Viktor Orb치n on the Hungarian Presidency
Institutions
2011-01-20 - 12:15
Former anti-Communist activist turned Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orb치n, European Parliament, Strasbourg, 18 January 2011 Interview with Hungary's Prime Minister Protecting the euro to be a key policy Setting up permanent security mechanisms to protect the euro and structural reforms should show the way out of the economic crisis, Hungary's Prime Minister Viktor Orb치n told us in an exclusive interview Wednesday after presenting his country's priorities to the European Parliament. The Hungarian Premier also explained how he felt about MEPs reactions to Hungary's Media Act.
One of the biggest challenges is the management of the financial crisis. What are the Hungarian Presidency's plans to stabilise the eurozone?
We are not a member of the euro zone but everybody has to mobilise to help protect it. It is not the euro that is in a currency crisis, but member countries that are struggling because of their public debt crises. First we must put into force security mechanisms to protect the euro and secondly member states have to carry out structural reforms.
What Hungarian initiatives/strategies will make EU citizens remember this presidency?
Urgent economic issues have focused attention away from other important things on the Hungarian Presidency's agenda. I will put back questions like the Danube strategy, which would be the creation of a macro development area within the EU. I will also focus on the creation of the North-South energy network system, besides the East-West system, in order to reduce energy dependency in Europe.
I also want focus on the Roma strategy because I see and feel the problem...if we don't handle the problem other member states who are not yet concerned might be in the future. We need a functioning Roma strategy in order to avoid their return to a nomadic life. We would also like to carry on with the EU enlargement. Enthusiasm has faded, but Europe still needs to accept some other countries so that it becomes really strong.
In which fields do you expect some difficulties in the next 6 months?
A difficult task for the Presidency will be the extension of the "Schengen" zone. I fully agree with Romania and Bulgaria, they have met the accession criteria to become members of the zone, but there is visible resistance from some EU member states. In a time of so many challenges, it is difficult to convince politicians and citizens to go ahead and to further extend our economic influence.
What's do you think about reactions from MEPs this morning on the media act?
I expected much worse. I am grateful that MEPs finally decided to express their views in a moderate way. Hungary has to come to terms with the fact that we are in a situation completely unknown to the West - it happened only perhaps in the 60s in France under De Gaulle - that a political family has a two-thirds majority. As it is a right-wing majority, the Left is suspicious whether or not we abuse the majority. Today's part-session has convinced me that it's going to be like this in the next semester as well. But we need to carry on the Presidency's tasks, and we feel up to the job.
How do you see cooperation with the EP during the time of the Presidency?
I think the political fight is one thing, but we also need to cooperate. I am ready to cooperate even with those MEPs most critical of me. Hungary is getting ready for a Parliament-friendly Presidency.
How do you wish to pass on the baton to the Polish Presidency?
The Polish will have a tough job. The debate on the financial perspectives will be in full swing during the Polish presidency. We have set up a Hungarian-Polish duologue for a smooth transition, and we are looking forward to a fruitful cooperation.
20110110STO11395 Debate in plenary Hungarian Presidency Interview on EbS Viktor Orb치n on Facebook
EN
1
PHOTO
20110120PHT12111.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://www.eu2011.hu/
EN
4
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/avservices/player/streaming.cfm?type=ebsvod&sid=172641
EN
5
LINK
http://www.facebook.com/orbanviktor
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110110FCS11408 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
