Citizens' Agora opening highlights crises and the different faces of poverty
Employment policy
Committees Employment and Social Affairs
2011-01-24 - 15:40
The issue of crises and the different faces of poverty that they engender were highlighted at the Citizens' Agora opening session on Thursday. European Parliament President Jerzy Buzek stressed the Agora's importance as a platform for participatory democracy and in bringing together citizen's thoughts, recommendations and initiatives.
Addressing the opening session, President Jerzy Buzek stressed the Agora's importance as a tool of dialogue and symbol of solidarity between the EU and citizens. "The very name Agora is very important because it takes us to the very roots of European democracy", which gives citizens and their representatives a unique opportunity to voice criticisms and put forward their proposals he said.
European Parliament Vice-Presidents Libor Rouček and Isabelle Durant, who are co-chairing the Agora, both referred to the important role the EU institutions have to play. Mr Rouček noted that "poverty has many faces", and Ms Durant called on the three workshops taking place in the afternoon to produce specific proposals upon which MEPs could act immediately.
European Commissioner László Andor called the Agora "a great example of participatory democracy" adding that whilst there are signs that our economies are beginning to pull slowly out of the crisis, its impact is still obvious.
Péter Györkös, representing the Hungarian Presidency of the EU Council of Ministers, stressed that combating poverty is a "driving component" of the Presidency. "In order to get out of this crisis we need a wholly new set of tools", and "the Hungarian Presidency is very open to be in dialogue with the citizens", he said.
Staffan Nilsson, President of the European Economic and Social Committee, reaffirmed EU's need to "engage people for a sustainable Europe". He stressed that there is a "social challenge triggered by the financial crisis" and combating poverty should be placed high on the political agenda.
Mercédès Bresso, President of the Committee of the Regions, highlighted the "importance of the territorial side", adding that "local authorities have a crucial role to play". "We must ensure that our society will be more inclusive", she said.
Unseen vulnerable groups
More social groups need to be included in the part of society that policymakers view as vulnerable to poverty and social exclusion, said civil society representatives speaking in the opening session.
"Young people and women are most at risk of facing unemployment", said one, whilst others highlighted the need to address the needs of the elderly and farmers.
Another speaker referred to "the problems faced by large families, having more than two children", whilst a trade union leader highlighted the new phenomenon of the "working poor". The vulnerability of migrants and minorities, particularly the Roma, was also stressed.
The issues of "energy poverty" and citizens facing large debts due to big loans were also raised and many representatives pointed to large differences between "new" and "old" Member States in terms of poverty.
Chorale des Sans-Abri
The Chorale des Sans-Abri, a choir formed by volunteers and homeless people in Nantes, France, gave a performance during the opening session, singing two songs.
20110124IPR12360 Citizens' Agora web site
EN
1
LINK
/parliament/public/staticDisplay.do?id=70&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
