Citizens' Agora on crises and poverty: civil society to table proposals
Employment policy
Committees Employment and Social Affairs
2011-01-24 - 17:29
The current financial and economic crises and the different forms of poverty will be the key issues at the third Citizens' Agora with civil society representatives at the European Parliament on 27 and 28 January. Organised in co-operation with the European Economic and Social Committee, the Agora includes plenary sessions, three parallel workshops and a conference with citizens in a situation of precariousness.
Citizens´ Agora is a unique tool, in structure and breadth, for bringing together the European Parliament and civil society to debate issues on Parliament's agenda. At this two-day Agora, many representatives of civil society organizations, at national and European levels, will exchange views with MEPs, EESC members, representatives of other EU institutions and key EU decision makers. The main topics will be the economic and financial crisis and poverty, with particular emphasis on the prevention and ultimate eradication of poverty and social exclusion.
Financial and economic crises and eradicating poverty
The third Citizens’ Agora takes place just after the end of 2010, the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion. Parliament has passed many resolutions on ways to tackle crisis and poverty issues and specifically on the establishment of a permanent crisis mechanism, the demographic challenge and solidarity between generations, the role of minimum income in combating poverty, the Europe 2020 strategy for growth and employment, adapting the Globalisation Adjustment Fund to the crisis, youth unemployment and extending social security to non-EU nationals. The EESC has also tackled these issues in various opinions.
The Agora conclusions will be presented to EU and national institutions.
Programme
Parliament's President Jerzy Buzek will address the opening session, which starts on 27 January, at 11:00h, followed by contributions from European Commissioner László Andor, Péter Györkös on behalf of the Hungarian EU Council Presidency, Staffan Nilsson, President of the European Economic and Social Committee, and Mercédès Bresso, President of the Committee of the Regions.
The two-day event will be chaired by Parliament's Vice-Presidents Isabelle Durant and Libor Rouček, while Staffan Nilsson, EESC’s President, will chair the closing plenary session.
Three parallel workshops will be held on 27 January (14.30h-18.00h) on:
• the economic and financial crisis and new forms of poverty (room ASP 3G3),
• the impact of the economic and financial crises on migration flows and integration processes (room ASP 3G2), and
• the economic and financial crisis: access to a decent and sustainable way of life for persons in situation of precariousness-challenges for the European model of society (room ASP 1G3).
In parallel to the Agora, a "consensus conference" will take place, chaired by Jérôme Vignon, bringing together 20 people aged over 60 living in a situation of precariousness. The debate with the experts will take place on 26 January, 14.30h-18.00h (room ASP 5G3). The conclusions of the workshops and the conference will be presented during the plenary session on 28 January (09.00h-11.30h).
Press conferences
There will be two press conferences:
on 25 January, at 11.30h, with EP Vice-President Isabelle Durant, EP Vice-President Libor Rouček and EESC President Staffan Nilsson (PHS 0A50, Anna Politkovskaya room), and
on 28 January, at 11.00h, with EP Vice-President Isabelle Durant, EP Vice-President Libor Rouček and EESC President Staffan Nilsson (PHS 0A50, Anna Politkovskaya room).
20110124IPR12355 Citizens' Agora web site
EN
1
LINK
/parliament/public/staticDisplay.do?id=70&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
