EP committees meet Hungarian ministers
Institutions
General
2011-01-25 - 12:13
The priorities of Hungary's Presidency of the EU Council of Ministers are being presented to European Parliament committees by Hungarian ministers at meetings on 24-27 January. This compilation will be updated daily during this week.
Economic affairs
Treaty change to set up a permanent bailout fund for Member States in difficulty, concluding the economic governance package and reviewing stability mechanisms, the first round of "European economic semester" policy co-ordination and the next set of financial services reforms will be the Presidency's key economic and monetary priorities, Hungary's finance minister Gyorgy Matolcsy told the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee on 24 January. Many MEPs pushed for commitments on plans for a financial transaction or activities tax and warned that it would be very difficult to conclude the economic governance package by June if Member States forged ahead without adapting to Parliament's position at an early stage.
In the chair: Sharon Bowles (ALDE, UK)
Immigration and asylum
Better managing migration flows, an efficient asylum system, the accession of Romania and Bulgaria to the Schengen area (once the technical requirements are met), and the fight against organised crime and terrorism are among the Hungarian Presidency's priorities, Interior Minister Sándor Pintér told the Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs Committee on 25 January. MEPs stressed the need for progress on the proposals for an asylum package, the single work and residency permit and on seasonal workers, so as to protect the fundamental rights of immigrants and asylum seekers in the EU. They also stressed the need to protect personal data, especially in the context of the passenger name record (PNR) negotiations with the USA.
Roma inclusion
Minister of State for Social Inclusion Zoltán Balog told MEPs that Roma issues are high on the agenda of the Hungarian Presidency. Presenting its priorities on 25 January, the minister listed the inclusion and active involvement of the Roma community, the fight against poverty, especially child poverty, and unemployment, better education and housing and better access to EU funds. Roma policies have a "massive social and economic interest" for the EU, the minister said, advocating an EU strategy for the Roma. MEPs backed the Presidency's priorities in this area, some urging that the EU should recognise the Roma genocide during World War II, others underlining the need for progress on the anti-discrimination directive, currently blocked in Council.
In the chair: Juan Fernando López Aguilar (S&D, ES)
Education, culture and sport
Rózsa Hoffman, the Hungarian Education Minister, promised more attention to improving pre-school education, reducing school drop-outs and fostering student mobility. She also suggested introducing a European Day of Talents. Maria Badia i Cutchet (S&D, ES) demanded more attention to vocational training, as well as aligning curricula more closely with the needs of the labour market. Helga Trüpel (Greens/EFA, DE) and Zoltán Bagó (EPP, HU) called for better integration of the Roma in the education system. Meanwhile, Marco Scurria (EPP, IT) asked about practical steps to promote volunteering. The minister promised to ensure the sharing of best practice and relevant information.
Culture Minister Géza Szöcs promised to take steps to establish the EU heritage label, integrate culture into the EU 2020 strategy, promote mobility of artists, reinforce the role of culture in the EU's external relations, enlarge the Europeana digital library, protect minors using the Internet and foster a single European digital market. The EU should be "not just an economic area but also a cultural and intellectual space", said the minister. Jean-Marie Cavada (EPP, FR) and Hans-Peter Martin (NA, AT) asked whether the Hungarian government intended to change the controversial media law, while Petra Kammerevert (S&D, DE) worried about recent cases of state intervention in culture and manifestations of anti-semitism in Hungary. The minister agreed that certain aspects of the media law need to be examined but he added that the "political attacks" on it were unjustified. Committee chair Doris Pack (EPP, DE) suggested waiting until the review of the law was completed and not misusing it for political reasons. Moreover, she added, anti-semitism was a problem for all of Europe and not just one country.
Noting the recognition of sports policy in the Lisbon Treaty, Attila Czene, Minister for Sport and an Olympic swimming champion, promised to fight for a sports framework programme to be included in the EU's 2014-2020 long-term budget. Many MEPs, including Parliament's rapporteur on sport Santiago Fisas Ayxela (EPP, ES) as well as Hannu Takkula (ALDE, FI), Piotr Borys (EPP, PL) and László Tőkés (EPP, RO), strongly supported this goal. Meanwhile, Emma McClarkin (ECR, UK) called for more help for grassroots sports, while Mary Honeyball (S&D, UK) urged that more be done to promote sport for senior citizens. The minister agreed with these demands, saying "we need to make sport part of our daily lives". Meanwhile, Miklós Soltész, Minister for Social Policy, promised to encourage young people to participate in political and social activities, as well as to tackle youth unemployment. He called for "bottom-up policy making" in this field. MEPs agreed with these goals and urged that the necessary resources be found.
In the chair: Doris Pack (EPP, DE)
Agriculture
Getting through proposals on the post-2013 future of the CAP, the food "quality package", legislation to help the dairy sector and the initiative on food distribution to deprived people (stuck in Council since 2009), will be the key challenges for the Hungarian Presidency, suggested committee chair Paolo De Castro (S&D, IT) on 25 January. On the possibility of capping direct payments, so as to allow a fairer distribution among farmers and Member States, Rural Development Minister Sándor Fazekas explained that a definition must be agreed which could include both land and employment criteria (the Presidency backs the latter). Asked about the dioxin scandal in Germany, Mr Fazekas said the EU food safety system had "worked well and guaranteed that contaminated meat does not reach people's tables". On the current pig meat crisis and price volatility, Mr Fazekas said "the Hungarian Presidency supports the introduction of a safety net" to mitigate the effects of natural disasters on producers and consumers.
In the chair: Paolo De Castro (S&D, IT)
Fisheries
Sustainability of fisheries and further developing aquaculture will be among the Presidency's top priorities, Rural Development Minister Sándor Fazekas told the Fisheries Committee on 25 January. This includes long-term management plans, fisheries partnership agreements and common fisheries policy reform.
Emphasizing the social and environmental aspects of the fisheries policy, Mr Fazekas stated that EU must "think long-term". Many MEPs welcomed his positive attitude towards sustainability efforts and management plans and noted that the Presidency of the country not so heavily involved in fisheries may be good news for the sector. They also stressed the importance of implementing the Lisbon Treaty properly and hoped that the Council would act within its existing legal framework.
In the chair: Carmen Fraga Estévez (EPP, ES)
International trade
Hungary backs Russia's accession to the WTO and free trade with Western Balkan countries, and would also like to conclude talks on a trade agreement with India, Foreign Minister Jànos Martonyi told the International Trade Committee on 25 January. MEPs quizzed Mr Martonyi inter alia on China's trade policy and future trade relations with Africa, the USA, Ukraine and Georgia.
In the chair: Vital Moreira (S&D, PT)
Justice
Bringing the EU closer to its citizens, removing obstacles they face in their everyday lives and enforcing their fundamental rights were among the priorities mentioned by Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Public Administration and Justice Tibor Navracsics to the Civil Liberties Committee on 26 January. As examples, Mr Navracsics cited the desire to make progress on proposals on protection of crime victims and on successions and wills.
Asked by MEPs about victims’ protection, Mr Navracsics said that the European Protection Order "will be kept on the agenda", although a qualified majority in Council cannot be achieved at the moment. The Presidency will await the Commission’s forthcoming proposals on the protection of victims, he added. Replying to questions on passenger name records and data protection, Mr Navracsics assured MEPs that the Presidency will look very closely at all data protection issues in the negotiations under way during this semester.
Hungarian media law
Some MEPs posed questions further to the 17 January hearing on Hungary's controversial media law, with regard in particular to the "potential threat to freedom of expression", the Media Council and the "balanced information" requirement.
"To tackle hate speech in the media is one of the objectives of the media law", and "any decision taken by the Media Council can be challenged in court", replied Mr Navracsics. "In Hungary there has been no doubt" about respect for freedom of expression, he said, but the government will give an official response very soon to the letter sent by the Commission last week. The "balanced coverage" issue "is very clearly delimited in the Hungarian context", he added. He also reiterated that the Presidency "will be ready and willing to amend or modify the text of the law" if the Commission's legal assessment shows this to be necessary.
In the chair: Juan Fernando López Aguilar (S&D, ES)
Internal Market
Making business less costly and avoiding market fragmentation to ensure competitiveness will be the guiding principles for the Hungarian Presidency, Minister of State for Competitiveness Zoltán Cséfalvay, told the Internal Market Committee on 26 January. As key priorities, he listed making progress on the Single Market Act, implementing the Services Directive, and the standardisation system. He also said that the time had arrived to reach a first-reading agreement on the proposed Consumer Rights Directive. MEPs responded favourably to these priorities. However, Consumer Rights Directive shadow Evelyne Gebhardt (S&D, DE), underlined the need to ensure quality and said that her group would not necessarily support a 1st reading agreement.
In the chair: Malcolm Harbour (ECR, UK)
Constitutional affairs
The simplified procedure for changing the EU Treaty with regard to a stability mechanism, implementing the citizens' initiative without delay and the EU's accession to the European Convention on Human Rights are the Presidency's three constitutional affairs priorities, Foreign Affairs Minister János Martonyi, told the Constitutional Affairs Committee on 26 January. Regarding the Treaty change, he stressed the importance of good co-ordination between Parliament, Council and the Commission. MEPs stressed the need to improve economic governance and put questions on the timeframe for EU enlargement. They also urged the Presidency to help put the citizens' initiative into practice as soon as possible.
In the chair: Carlo Casini (EPP, IT)
Environment and public health
Addressing the Environment and Public Health Committee on 25 January, National Resources Minister Miklos Réthelyi noted recent EU progress in cross-border healthcare and patient information rights. He also stressed the need to focus on certain groups including the elderly and children (especially those of immigrants), and underlined the importance of expanding preventive work in the field of health, for example against increasing obesity rates.
On 26 January, National Development Minister Tamàs Fellegi noted MEPs' calls for a unilateral move to a 30% CO2 emission reduction target (by 2020, from 1990 levels) and for the EU's 20% energy efficiency target to be made binding, adding that there was no consensus among Member States but that the Presidency was working towards achieving one at the June Council.
Rural Development Minister Sandor Fazekas said he hoped to make progress on key pending proposals, notably on GMO cultivation rules and novel foods (the latter is entering Parliament/Council conciliation). On the red sludge disaster in his country, he considered that Hungary had acted in line with EU legislation, although one MEP noted the European Commission had interpreted certain points differently.
In the chair: Jo Leinen (S&D, DE)
Energy
The EU needs to adopt strategic documents on energy policy and tackle priorities at EU level, National Development Minister in charge of Climate and Energy Tamás Fellegi told the Industry, Research and Energy Committee on 26 January. After the EU Council dedicated to energy, the Presidency will try to build consensus among Member States on infrastructure investment under the Energy Strategy 2020 and its implementing arrangements. Mr Fellegi also advocated completing the single market in energy and more transparent price setting.
Telecommunications and information society
Networks and communication security and radio spectrum policy are the Presidency's key information society priorities, Minister of State for Information and Communications Zsolt Nyitrai told the Industry, Research and Energy committee on 26 January. He reiterated the Presidency's commitment to pursue the Galileo satellite navigation programme and promised to pay attention to roaming service charges.
In the chair: Herbert REUL (EPP, DE)
EU enlargement
"Croatia's accession is now within arms reach" Hungarian Foreign Minister János Martonyi told the Foreign Affairs Committee on 26 January. Mr Martonyi confirmed that his top priority would be to conclude EU accession negotiations with Hungary by June 2011. "If all goes well", he added, "the negotiations will be closed during the Hungarian Presidency, so the actual signing ceremony could be passed on to our Polish friends".
In the chair: Gabriele Albertini (EPP, IT)
Legal affairs
Improving the system of mutual recognition of judgements (Brussels I) and clearer rules for international successions are the Presidency's key legal affairs priorities, Minister for Justice and Public Administration Mr Tibor Navracsics told the Legal Affairs Committee on 26 January. MEPs agreed with those priorities but also stressed the need to make progress in the area of European contract law and mediation in cross-border matters.
Minister of State for Strategic Affairs Zoltàn Cséfalvay, stressed the need to make progress on the unitary patent, the European private company statute and the Consumer Rights Directive. MEPs urged the Council to pay more attention to the copyright laws for orphan works and the collective management of rights, and also to exempt micro-companies from the 4th Company Law Directive.
In the chair: Klaus-Heiner Lehne (EPP, DE)
Women's rights and gender equality
Gender equality is a precondition for improving growth, employment and social cohesion, National Resources Minister Miklós Réthelyi told the Women's Rights and Gender Equality Committee on 26 January. The Presidency's priorities include improving the European Pact for Gender Equality, tackling the demographic challenge, improving the working conditions of women, reconciling work and family life, and combating violence against women. MEPs quizzed the minister about current legislative proposals concerning the anti-discrimination directive and the revision of the maternity leave directive, and also asked what the Presidency plans to do about gender equality, given that it was not mentioned in the EU2020 strategy.
In the chair: Edite Estrela (S&D, PT)
Transport
Achieving an agreement on the Eurovignette, progress towards completing the EU railway market and cross-border enforcement of penalties for serious traffic offences will the key areas among the Presidency priorities where Parliament will be heavily, Secretary of State for Infrastructure Pál Völner told the Transport and Tourism Committee on 25 January. Mr Völner also stressed the need to find ways to close "missing links" on trans-European transport networks and simplify the use of European airspace by preparing the roll-out of the Single European Sky proposals. MEPs welcomed the Presidency's special focus on inland shipping and said they would closely monitor how the new "Danube strategy" translates into future sustainable transport networks.
In the chair: Brian Simpson (S&D, UK)
Regional development and cohesion policy
“Without strong cohesion policy, no strong Europe!”, National Development Minister Tamás Fellegi told the Regional Development Committee on 26 January. Through several high-level meetings starting in February, the Presidency will initiate a substantive debate on the future of cohesion policy and prepare the ground for negotiations on the post-2013 programming period, he promised. Mr Fellegi underlined the need for “moderate change” to improve efficiency, cut red tape and implement 2020 goals in cohesion policy. Cohesion policy must remain well-funded and cover all EU regions, he stressed. Asked by MEPs about the possibility of splitting EU structural and social funds, he advocated stepping up co-ordination whilst "maintaining the integrated approach".
In the chair: Danuta Hübner (EPP, PL)
Industry and research
The three guiding principles for legislation to help the EU business community grow in a time of crisis should be removing barriers to doing business, tackling market fragmentation (which increases operating costs, especially for small and medium-sized firms) and reducing bureaucratic obstacles to competitiveness, Minister for State for Strategic Affairs Zoltán Cséfalvay, told the Industry, Research and Energy Committee on 27 January. On research, Mr Cséfalvay called for a "quantum leap" in simplifying procedures for obtaining EU funds, so that and innovators can "focus on innovation instead of administration".
In the chair: Herbert REUL (EPP, DE)
20110124IPR12354
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
