Dioxin contamination in Germany: MEPs call for stricter controls, penalties
Food safety
2011-01-25 - 16:02
An egg is broken open in Cologne, Germany, 05 January 2011. The dioxin found in animal feed and eggs still concerns consumers, justice, politicians and nutrition experts. ©BELGA/Oliver Berg The EU is considering stricter food security rules following the recent dioxin scandal The cancer-causing compound was found in German eggs and poultry, some of which were exported to other EU countries. The EU is considering stricter food security rules following the recent dioxin scandal in Germany. The cancer-causing compound was found in eggs and poultry, some of which were exported to other EU countries. MEPs debated the issue with European Commission representatives during the January plenary and during the Environment Committee on 24 January.
Background on the dioxin contamination
In December 2010 German health authorities discovered dioxins in eggs and poultry after fat intended for use in industry was mixed with animal feed. Thousands of farms in Germany were closed. Potentially contaminated exports have been reported in the Netherlands and Britain and have also found their way to France and Denmark.
Several countries have since banned imports of German farm products, including Slovakia, South Korea and China .
Although the eggs found on certain farms in Germany had five times the legal limit of dioxin, consumers would have to eat vast quantities of eggs, or their by-products, for it to pose a serious risk to human health.
The Commission has said there are no grounds for a ban on exports of German products as they pose "no immediate health risk" and called the import restrictions by South Korea "out of proportion".
European Commission considering stricter rules
During the debate in plenary, the Commissioner for Health and Consumer Policy John Dalli said he is considering stricter rules for controls on dioxins and exploring the possibility of a strict separation of the production of fats and oils intended for food production and those intended for industrial use.
He was supported by German MEPs Christian Democrat Albert Dess and Socialist Ulrike Rodust who called for harsher sentences in cases of grossly negligent food handling. German Green Martin Häusling said there is a need for a fundamental change in many areas of policy; "food should come from farms and not from industrial plants."
During the Environment Committee discussion Dutch Green MEP Bas Eickhout suggested the use of colouring to ensure that oil used illegally for non-food purposes will be detected immediately.
Background
Because of close cooperation in Europe, food contamination scares can spread rapidly to several EU countries. EU guidelines are designed to prevent food contamination but are not binding. Individual member states are responsible for controlling what enters the food chain.
The EU requires that controls are thorough and independent. In the current dioxin scare in Germany, the manufacturer was given the task of conducting tests on their own produce, but it is alleged that the firm did not pass on the results of the tests to government authorities.
There is a rapid response system for such cases. German authorities alerted the European Commission to the contaminated feed problem at the end of December 2010, which set off a rapid response system in other member states.
What is dioxin?
Dioxin is a group of compounds that could cause cancer; more than 90 % of human exposure to dioxin comes from food. The EU began setting limits for dioxin after the eggs and poultry scare in Belgium in 1999.
20110121STO12289 Environment, Public Health and Food Safety Debate in the plenary 17 January EC on dioxin scandal
EN
1
PHOTO
20110120PHT12117.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=ENVI
EN
3
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/player?date=20110117&language=en
EN
4
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/food/food/chemicalsafety/contaminants/dioxin_germany_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
