Background note to the draft reports on economic governance
Economic and monetary affairs
2011-02-03 - 17:06
MEPs steering new economic governance laws through Parliament presented their draft reports in the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee in January. They propose stricter budget rules and sanctions to prevent future debt crises in the Eurozone and enable sustainable growth. They also propose radical changes to current laws so as to enhance accountability and instill a sense of ownership, both of which they judge were sorely lacking in the first ten years of EU economic and monetary union.
To this end, the rapporteurs propose a stronger role for the European Commission at all stages of the various governance processes and reduce the scope for political back-scratching, by making it more difficult for Member States to vote down a Commission decision and broker deals to sidestep the rules. They also say that more decisions should be made public and that various dialogues should be "instutitionalised", e.g. by including "European Semester" for economic policy co-ordination in the legal texts, by having Member States come to the Parliament to explain their economic policy and budgetary positions, and by giving a greater say to national parliaments.
The common themes emerging from the rapporteurs' positions include:
further use of the "reverse voting" mechanism in order to strengthen preventive surveillance and to make the Commission´s assessments and decisions more independent from the Council,
a stronger role for the Commission, which should be more accountable to the European Parliament,
closer and timelier involvement of the European Parliament and national parliaments,
dialogue and surveillance visits by Commission and ECB to the Member States to contribute to more transparency and ownership, and
fine revenues to be credited to the stability mechanism and not to Member States not running an excessive deficit.
20110203BKG13165
The new economic governance structure and timeline
The economic governance model proposed by the Commission is based on six legal texts, four of which involve the European Parliament on a par with the Council (co-decision). The rapporteurs are determined to treat the six texts as a package with equal progress required on all fronts. The texts are the following, with the respective rapporteurs in brackets:
Prudent fiscal policy making (Corien WORTMANN-KOOL, EPP, NL),
Strengthening the debt criterion in the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) (Diogo FEIO, EPP, PT),
Budget standards (Vicky FORD, ECR, UK),
Macroeconomic imbalances - Prevention (Elisa FERREIRA, S&D, PT),
Macroeconomic imbalances in the euro area - Sanctions (Carl HAGLUND, ALDE, FI), and
Sanctions for breach of SGP in the euro area (Sylvie GOULARD, ALDE, FR)
Expected timeline
It is difficult at this point to give any precise indication of timelines. The following is an approximation and is subject to changes:
Mid February
Deadline for submitting amendments to the draft reports
Mid March
Public discussion of amendments
Mid April
Vote in the economic and monetary affairs committee
Mid April onwards
Negotiations with Council and Commission
Overview of each draft report
Prudent fiscal policy making
European economic governance should first and foremost be a matter of common concern and responsibility of the Member States and the role of their national parliaments needs to be enhanced to this end. Therefore, a chapter on national ownership is introduced.
The European Parliament can invite a Member State to explain its policies for restoring a prudent fiscal policy.
More disclosure of Council and Commission decisions required, including warnings to Member States.
A stronger role for the Commission in surveillance, including through more information to be given to it by the Member States and a more regular involvement of the Commission in the different assessment phases.
For Member States which have not yet reached their medium term objectives (MTOs), the rapporteur keeps the deficit reduction benchmark of 0.5% of GDP, but underlines that the country-specific adjustments should be appropriate and sustainable, allowing room for budgetary manoeuvre, with special consideration of the needs for public investments.
Includes the European Economic Semester in the legal text (and not only in a code of conduct endorsed by the Council), thus ensuring better integrated, deeper and wider economic policy surveillance.
In the event of significant deviation from the country specific budgetary objectives, incentives for Member States to adapt their policies, which include additional reporting requirements and on-site monitoring in liaison with the ECB for Member States in the Eurozone.
Strengthening the debt criterion in the SGP
Reducing the time set for Council decisions to what it was before 2005. Any Council decision to give notice to the Member State concerned to take deficit reduction measures shall be taken within one month (whereas the Commission´s proposal is two months). Where the conditions for applying Treaty Article 126(11) are met * , the Council shall impose sanctions no later than two months after the Council decision giving notice to the Member State concerned (whereas the Commission´s proposal is no later than four months).
Member States outside the Eurozone are free to comply with the provisions of the regulation.
Strengthening Parliament´s role in the surveillance process. Parliament can invite the Member State concerned to explain its budgetary and economic policy or the reasons why, despite the warnings received, it has not corrected its excessive deficit. The annual policy recommendations by the Commission should be discussed in the European Parliament before the beginning of discussions in the Council.
Government debt to GDP ratio is to be considered diminishing sufficiently if it has reduced over the last three years at an average rate of 1/20th (around 5%) of the excess debt per year (the Commission proposal requires a 1/20th reduction every year).
Credit fines to the stability mechanism and not to those Member States not running an excessive deficit.
Member States outside the Eurozone are free to comply with the provisions of the regulation.
Budget standards
Emphasizes the role of independent fiscal institutes, such as the UK Institute for Fiscal Studies, in offering expertise and ensuring transparency and credibility.
In the accounting and statistics chapter, the rapporteur proposes to facilitate a transition phase until the full cost-benefit impact of extending the reporting requirements can be assessed. Cash-based fiscal reporting need only be published quarterly for local government (contrary to the Commission proposal, which required monthly reporting).
Member States should publicly audit their forecasts and regularly evaluate, on an ex-post basis, their own forecasting records, in order to ascertain whether their forecasting processes have proven to be robust. If for three consecutive years Commission forecasts are more accurate, the Member State must base its budgetary planning on the Commission forecasts.
Ensures that escape clauses should be limited, exceptional and specific, whilst their use is fully disclosed and explained.
Eurozone Member States will have to ensure that they enforce specific legislative provisions in order to best ensure compliance with the requirements of this Directive.
A similar level of transparency should be required of the EU budget and the impact of the EU budget should also be discussed during the European Semester.
Macroeconomic imbalances - Prevention
Involving the European Parliament in the assessment and surveillance processes, as well as in establishing an indicative scoreboard as a starting point for monitoring imbalances.
The Commission shall set the list of relevant indicators to be included in the scoreboard ** . - The scoreboard should evolve depending on the changing nature of macroeconomic imbalances and the availability of relevant statistics.
The same thresholds shall be applicable to Member States whose currency is the euro and to Member States whose currency is not the euro.
The scoreboard should not be used mechanically and neither should an imbalance assessment through in-depth reviews and missions to the Member States concerned be carried out mechanically without taking into consideration Member State-specific circumstances and a broad range of economic variables.
The corrective action plan shall be coherent with the Stability and Growth Pact, the Stability and Convergence Programmes, the National Reform Programmes and the medium and long-term objectives, namely convergence and a Union strategy for growth and jobs.
Macroeconomic imbalances in euro area - Sanctions
The yearly fine shall be minimum 0.1% and maximum 0.5% of the GDP of the Member State concerned in the preceding year depending on the severity of non-compliance with Council or Commission recommendations.
The collected fines should be allocated to a permanent crisis mechanism (European Monetary Fund). Until such a fund is established, the fines should be credited to the European Financial Stability Facility.
One-off fine of 0.5 % of GDP for Member States which fudge their accounts (manipulation of financial data, falsified statistics, providing misleading information).
Fines should be imposed based on a failure to comply with recommendation or to submit a sufficient corrective action plan. Fines should therefore not be triggered by the mere existence of macroeconomic imbalances.
Enables the Commission to reduce fines on grounds of exceptional economic circumstances or in order to take into account a cumulative effect of fines or sanctions. The total yearly amount of fines shall not exceed 0.5% of a Member State's GDP excluding fines for fudged accounts. The complete cancellation of fines is removed.
Member States outside the euro area are free to comply with the provisions of the regulation.
Sanctions for breach of SGP in the Eurozone
There must be incentives for complying with the SGP and not only sanctions for breaching it. These include Eurobonds, unspent EU budget appropriations and a European Monetary Fund.
European Commission emergency powers if the stability of the Euro is put at risk by the actions of a Member State.
One-off fines for Member States which fudge their accounts (manipulation of financial data, falsified statistics, providing misleading information).
Removes possibility for a Member State to request a reduction or cancellation of a sanction or fine. Any reductions or cancellations may only be decided by the Commission in order to take account of exceptional economic circumstances or the cumulative effect of fines or sanctions.
---
* Notably when a Member State fails to comply with a Council decision that it must take, within a specified time, measures to reduce its deficit.
** The list of indicators shall include the following sets of indicators: internal imbalances (including private and public debt and its evolution; internal income inequalities; unemployment rates; and asset price developments with particular attention to real estate, and financial markets), external imbalances (including current account composition, balance and evolution; the evolution of export market shares in Union and third-country markets; and net foreign assets positions), and internal market developments Press release issued after official presentation of draft reports in ECON Press release issued after a public hearing on economic governance in ECON Rapporteur: Corien Wortmann-Kool (EPP, NL) Rapporteur: Diogo Feio (EPP, PT) Rapporteur: Elisa Ferreira (S&D, PT) Rapporteur: Sylvie Goulard (ALDE, FR) Rapporteur: Carl Haglund (ALDE, FI) Rapporteur: Vicky Ford (ECR, UK)
EN
1
LINK
/en/pressroom/content/20110124IPR12356/html/Economic-governance-not-just-repairs-but-a-thorough-overhaul
EN
2
LINK
/en/pressroom/content/20110110IPR11477/html/An-economic-governance-system-for-Europe's-long-term-needs
EN
3
LINK
/members/public/geoSearch/view.do?country=NL&partNumber=1&language=EN&id=28167
EN
4
LINK
/members/public/geoSearch/view.do?country=PT&partNumber=1&language=EN&id=96977
EN
5
LINK
/members/public/geoSearch/view.do?country=PT&partNumber=1&language=EN&id=28308
EN
6
LINK
/members/public/yourMep/view.do?name=goulard&partNumber=1&language=EN&id=97137
EN
7
LINK
/members/public/yourMep/view.do?name=haglund&partNumber=1&language=EN&id=96683
EN
8
LINK
/members/public/yourMep/view.do?name=ford&partNumber=1&language=EN&id=96949
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
