Art and culture: a true industry and it's so much more than aesthetics
Education
2011-02-10 - 10:45
French MEP Marie-Thérèse Sanchez-Schmid (EPP) wants to unlock the potential of cultural and creative industries Intellectual property protection crucial Financing and use of European regional and cohesion funds should also be exploited says MEP Culture…Often seen as an ephemeral sideshow to the true business of making and spending money, it is of course anything but. Indeed, it is not just Europe's pride and joy, but since the dawn of time a perennial growth industry worth today hundreds of billions of euros. The EU wants to see this further protected and enhanced and French MEP Marie-Thérèse Sanchez-Schmid (EPP), who has prepared a report on unlocking this vast potential, shared her thoughts with us.
The report on "unlocking the potential of cultural and creative industries" represents Parliament's response to a European Commission Green Paper on the economic and social importance of the sector and points out the vast opportunities that globalisation and the digital era represent, offering "major new opportunities to develop and improve the hitherto largely untapped potential to create growth and jobs.
A €600 billion annual industry
This is, after all, a sector worth some €600 billion annually, or 2.6% of EU gross domestic product, as Ms Sanchez-Schmid points out, adding that even the crisis hasn’t dented its "exponential" growth, not even in the luxury goods sector.
"This is a very rich and varied sector with enormous potential, representing a hugely important segment of the economy, which is only enhanced as we enter the digital age," Marie-Thérèse Sanchez-Schmid explains. But it hasn’t yet reached its full potential, if only because it is "still to a very large extent restricted by national borders" and this for an industry that has proven to be very export-oriented.
Breaking down these barriers is, or can be, the work of the EU, which is already active with programmes like MEDIA (funding for the audiovisual industry) or Parliament's own LUX prize for cinema.
"The EU can help on many different levels, from mobility of artists and works of art, to dissemination and digitisation, to creating the necessary regulatory framework for intellectual property rights protection in the digital domain", which incidentally is extremely important to those working and creating in the sector, she said.
"Banks don’t trust artists"
Indeed the member states themselves, she points out, are all for EU-wide regulation when it comes to protecting property rights, a subject that may be sensitive today but, as she also points out is in truth, very simple: "if everything is given away for free and those who create cannot live off their creations, then the whole sector will simply die"
But if legal protection is the one pillar of potential EU contribution, then adequate financing is the other. After all, as she put it "banks don’t trust artists"…
Regional funds must be exploited to the full
Surely convincing member states to invest in culture and art might prove difficult at this time of all round belt tightening? Not so argues Ms Sanchez-Schmid, pointing out the potential benefits and the ample sources of EU funding available, while as her report underlines, an adapted taxation system is also essential.
Regional and cohesion funds are a prime example of this and as she points out, a lot of Europe's cultural capital is also intensely regional, including festivals like Cannes, Avignon or Salzburg that provide enormous economic benefits to the cities and regions hosting them: "we must really encourage the regions to exploit these funds" to support their creative industries and enhance the economic value of their cultural heritage.
A heritage that is itself largely the product of centuries of state patronage and creative use of public funds.
20110204STO13210 Marie-Thérèse Sanchez-Schmid The report EC Green Paper
EN
1
PHOTO
20110207PHT13255.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/members/expert/groupAndCountry/view.do;jsessionid=296E4F6916ACD7673996D90A11CD63BD.node2?language=EN&partNumber=1&group=2952&country=FR&id=96746
EN
3
LINK
/meetdocs/2009_2014/documents/cult/pr/852/852269/852269en.pdf
EN
4
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/culture/our-policy-development/doc2577_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
