MEPs question independence and impartiality of Russia's judiciary
Human rights
Plenary sittings
2011-02-17 - 13:15
Russia's judiciary appears increasingly politicised and lacking in impartiality, says the European Parliament in a resolution passed on Thursday 17 February, citing the questionable verdict on the Khodorkovsky case and violations of human rights, including the right to peaceful assembly.
Voicing their concern over reports of politically-motivated trials, unfair procedures and failures to investigate serious crimes such as killings and harassment, MEPs urge the Russian authorities to bring perpetrators to justice in an effective, impartial and independent manner. Russia's judicial system needs reform to deliver on President Dmitry Medvedev's pledges of greater justice and transparency - principles which are enshrined in the Partnership for Modernisation, say MEPs.
Effective investigation of high-profile cases
Prompted by concern over the verdict in the second trial of Michail Khodorkovsky and Platon Lebedev, on embezzlement and money-laundering charges, MEPs "call for an independent judicial review" in the appeal proceedings.
MEPs also call for "a review of charges and ongoing procedures" against Sakharov Prize winner Oleg Orlov, of the Memorial organisation. They also remind the Russian authorities that "no effective investigations" were carried out into the murders of journalists Anna Politkovskaya, Natalia Estemirova and Anastasia Baburova and the death of lawyer Sergei Magnitsky.
Political space for opposition
Many human rights violations concern the right to peaceful assembly. MEPs deplore the repeated arrests of opposition figures and the dispersal of peaceful rallies organised by the "article 31" group. Former Prime Minister Boris Nemtsov and about 70 other persons were arrested after an opposition demonstration in Moscow on 31 December 2010, notes the resolution.
Review of cooperation tools
The new EU-Russia Partnership and Cooperation Agreement now being negotiated should play a prominent role in promoting democracy, the rule of law and respect for human and fundamental rights, say MEPs. The EU should also bring more pressure to bear through another bilateral tool, which is the six-monthly Human Rights Consultations, bringing together EU and Russian government officials. So far, these have improved neither Russia's human rights record nor the treatment of human rights defenders on the ground, notes the resolution.
The resolution was approved by a show of hands.
20110216IPR13771 Adopted text will be available here (click on 17 February) Watch the debate here (click on 15 February)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/research-by-date?language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
