EP President Jerzy Buzek on Libya: "this is the point of no return"
External relations
General
2011-02-23 - 09:40
"I am appalled by the latest news from Libya. Waging lethal warfare on its own people is an act of inhuman brutality," said EP President Jerzy Buzek. "The regime and its leader have lost any remaining legitimacy. This is the point of no return: I call on Colonel Gaddafi to acknowledge it and to draw the consequences."
The President of the European Parliament, Jerzy Buzek, made the following statement on the dramatic developments in Libya:
"I am appalled by the latest news from Libya. Calling on the people to turn against the demonstrators and ordering the military to use force against them is unjustifiable. Even more, waging lethal warfare on its own people is an act of inhuman brutality.
The regime and its leader have lost any remaining legitimacy. This is the point of no return: I call on Colonel Gaddafi to acknowledge it and to draw the consequences.
The atrocities perpetrated can never remain unpunished. All those responsible will have to be brought to justice. I call on the military to assume its proper role - that of the defender of the people. I commend the courage of those soldiers who have already done so.
The international community must respond. I expect the UN Security Council to adopt concrete measures to prevent further bloodshed. The League of Arab States must fulfil its proper role in preventing further violence.
The European Union is ready to act in the frontline - be it by enforcing Security Council decisions, bringing emergency assistance to the Libyan people or introducing effective sanctions against perpetrators of violent repression.
We must be prepared not only to assist the changes in Libya. We must also ensure that contingency plans are in place to respond to a possible humanitarian crisis. Our obligation is to defend the dignity of the people, defend the dignity of human life.
The EU's ultimate goal is to ensure that our neighbours have a future of liberty and prosperity in their own country. They should no longer have to flee from an oppressive regime. We should support them to build a free and democratic country."
20110223IPR14159 President Buzek's web page
EN
1
LINK
http://proxy.ep-president.eu/president/view/en/the_president.html
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
