Hans van Baalen on Japan: "No one knows where it will end"
External relations
2011-03-14 - 17:30
Aerial of Sendai, Japan, following earthquake. ©US Navy Imagery We speak to Dutch Liberal MEP Hans van Baalen chair of Parliament's delegation for Japan on the disaster The greatest fear expressed in his discussions was "the threat of a meltdown" The unimaginable catastrophe that has struck Japan is reverberating around the world, a humanitarian disaster on a scale that is still difficult to comprehend. The earthquake and the Tsunami have taken their toll but the nuclear threat is still present in this, Japan's "worst disaster wince WWII" as its prime minister called it. We spoke to Dutch Liberal MEP Hans van Baalen, chair of Parliament's delegation for Japan on the disaster, its aftermath and what Europe can do to help.
The magnitude of the disaster, Mr van Baalen reminds us, is huge, the toll is getting heavier by the hour and the worst is that "no one knows where it will end". As he explains, upon hearing the news of the terrible disaster he contacted Japanese diplomats in Brussels and The Hague, including the Japanese permanent representative to the EU, Ambassador Nobutake Odano. The greatest fear expressed in these discussions was the threat of a meltdown in one or more of the nuclear plants hit by the earthquake, a fear that of course still hasn’t receded.
"I also called members of the Japanese Parliament, the Diet, who I know as member of the delegation and every single one of them had family or friends in the stricken area" he added, bringing home the human dimension of a disaster that "is huge and can become even bigger".
"The Japanese are doing what they can, they are well equipped, trained and prepared for such a calamity, but", he points out, "the power of the Tsunami was far bigger than anyone expected.
In a conversation he had with Japan's former Prime Minister, Yukio Hatoyama, of the Democratic Party of Japan, the latter expressed his gratitude for the EU offers for humanitarian assistance and disaster support, insisting particularly on the potential need for Europe's nuclear expertise. As he pointed out "this is a very well organised country and they will pinpoint exactly what they need and will ask us for help". So far, he explains "they don’t need food or medicine".
Turning to the future, Mr van Baalen explains that "to a very high extent this depends on what happens at the nuclear power plants. The loss of 10,000 people is an immense tragedy, one you cannot comprehend, but if a power plant explodes creating a new Chernobyl, then the repercussions will be felt throughout the region, throughout the world even. The Japanese "can cope with the earthquake and the Tsunami" but we can only "hope that they will also be able to cope with the nuclear threat". A nuclear disaster "will have far greater implications".
Thus if the question is what can Europe do to help Japan, the answer, Mr van Baalen insists, can only be for Europe, indeed the entire international community, to unite the brightest people, the best experts and place them at the disposal of Japan, ready to help the moment such help is requested.
20110314STO15458 Hans van Baalen The Japan delegation's website
EN
1
PHOTO
20110304PHT14847.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/members/public/geoSearch/view.do?country=NL&partNumber=1&language=EN&id=96937
EN
3
LINK
/activities/delegations/homeDel.do?body=D-JP&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
