MEPs express sorrow at disaster in Japan and criticise EU response on Libya
European Council
General
2011-03-16 - 17:32
The catastrophic events in Japan, the EU's reaction towards Libya and the outcome of the recent Eurozone summit were the main topics discussed during a special meeting of leading MEPs with the presidents of the European Council and European Commission. Most MEPs were highly critical of the EU's response to the Libya issue.
EP President Buzek expressed his condolences in the name of the European Parliament to the entire Japanese nation and described the situation as the biggest human tragedy in the country since World War II. He asked the House to observe a minute's silence for the victims of the earthquake and the tsunami
Herman van Rompuy, President of the European Council , described the situation in Japan as a "catastrophe" and confirmed that Japan asked yesterday for EU assistance in the form of humanitarian aid. He also assured the EP that there was "strong support" from all stakeholders for the "organisation of stress tests" on nuclear power plants. While welcoming the events in Tunisia and Egypt, he emphasised that the outcome in the region was uncertain and might even be controversial, adding "there is no glamorous march to freedom." On the issue of the pact for the euro, which was informally decided at the summit of 11 March, he stressed that it would "strengthen the economic pillar of monetary union".
Commission President José Manuel Barroso underscored yesterday's request by Japan for humanitarian aid. Regarding the concerns about migration, he announced that a policy document on migration and refugees would be presented to the June European Council. Regarding the Eurozone Summit, he thanked Parliament "for the approach it took in favour of the community method" rather than the intergovernmental method. On the issue of the Financial Transaction Tax, Mr Barroso expressed his own support but stressed that it was difficult to achieve a consensus of the G20, and especially of emerging economies.
The first political group leader to take the floor, Joseph Daul (FR) in the name of the EPP group, reaffirmed that all the EU's attention was focused on the "disaster" in Japan but he stressed that "nuclear energy is a key element of energy independence" and asked the EU not to forget this. On the European Council, he said that his group backed its conclusions, which he described as "very clear", including on the euro issue. "Our task as Europeans is to assist people to achieve change and help them make their dreams come true. The first message from Europe must not be fear or introspection, but support and solidarity. Europe must come up with credible solutions for the people of Libya."
Hannes Swoboda (S&D, AT) welcomed the decision to conduct stress tests on the EU's nuclear plants but stressed that these should become mandatory and that the time had come to focus on energy efficiency and renewables. He called for the reform process in Libya to continue, saying Ghaddafi should be isolated and step down because he had lost all legitimacy. "We should give new content to our relationship with the Middle East", he added. On the Euro pact he stressed that growth was not one of its objectives, while asking for the introduction of "fair partnerships with trade unions" and the start of discussions on Eurobonds.
"What do we do to avoid a second Srebenica, Rwanda or a new Darfur?" asked Guy Verhofstadt (BE) representing the Liberal group. "What will we say next week if Benghazi is taken over? Business as usual? Are we going to close our eyes again?" he warned, adding "this would be a new black page of European history" because nothing has been learned from the past. On the Japan incident, he saluted the "50 heroes at the factory of Fakushima who risked their lives to save the people of Japan" and suggested that this incident in Japan can serve as a wake-up call for the development of alternative sources of energy.
Jan Zahradil (ECR, CZ) referred to the power of nature and asked that "we should not allow this national disaster to be exploited in a populist way". He added that the EU's ability to react on the Libya issue was "limited partly because of the differences among us, which we should respect".
"We must ensure that we interpret this catastrophe in the right way", said Rebecca Harms (Greens/EFA, DE) . She also wanted to move the process towards renewable energy. She asked why the EU was not doing more to impose a no-fly zone in Libya, adding that "this inability of Europe to take action will not be easily forgiven".
Lothar Bisky (GUE/NGL, DE) suggested that the events in Japan were "not only a natural disaster, but partly also a man-made disaster". He argued that if the violence in Libya did not stop "the fragile shoots of democracy could be destroyed" and called for "ruthless implementation of the sanctions".
Nigel Farage (EFD, UK) warned that there was "no legitimacy to take military action", saying that a military intervention may become a Vietnam-type experience.
20110316IPR15694 Watch the recording of the debate European Summit conclusions Stress tests for Europe's atomic power plants after nuclear scare in Japan (15.03.2011)
EN
1
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/player?eventCode=20110316-1330-SPECIAL-UNKN&language=en&byLeftMenu=researchotherevents&category=SPECIAL&format=wmv#anchor1
EN
2
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/ec/119780.pdf
EN
3
LINK
/en/pressroom/content/20110315IPR15584/html/Stress-tests-for-Europe's-atomic-power-plants-after-nuclear-scare-in-Japan
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
