EU criticised over lack of action on Libya; urged to look at nuclear power
Institutions
2011-03-16 - 16:50
Senior EU leaders joined MEPs for a minute's silence for the victims of the natural disaster in Japan before the meeting opened. 16 March 2011 MEPs hold open conference of Presidents to debate recent issues Wide-ranging debate covered Japan, the euro-zone and Libya In a wide-ranging debate covering Japan, the euro-zone and Libya, the EU came in for criticism from many MEPs for failing to take action to help the Libyan people in their fight for democracy. There was consensus that the EU should hold itself ready to help Japan in any way possible and in the wake of the burgeoning nuclear crisis many MEPs urged the EU to search for alternative sources of energy.
Japan and nuclear danger
EP President Jerzy Buzek opened Wednesday's meeting by paying tribute to "Japanese workers and ordinary citizens who with dignity and peace are trying to restore normality following" the devastating earthquake and tsunami and called for a minute's silence for the victims of the "unimaginable, the human tragedy" in Japan.
European Council President Herman Van Rompuy said the EU had received a request for humanitarian aid Tuesday. A meeting of heads of government 24-25 March will discuss the "impact of the catastrophe in Japan and its consequences for the world and its safety". He said there was broad support for the idea of stress testing European nuclear plants.
Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso said, "we also stand ready to provide further and more specific assistance regarding the situation in nuclear power plants, if requested".
Mr Joseph Daul (EPP, France) called for a thoroughgoing substantive "debate on nuclear safety...emotion should not blind us" nuclear energy is important for our energy independence.
Austrian Socialist Hannes Swoboda commented on the nuclear issue saying. "The introduction of stress test should be mandatory but appropriate legislation needs to be created to this end. We have to focus more on energy efficiency, renewables."
Lothar Bisky (GUE/NGL): "Japan is a man-made not only a natural disaster. It shows what kind of monstrous machines we have in Europe too. I'm not talking only about power plants but nuclear weapons as well."
Libya, Egypt
Reporting on the meeting of EU leaders 11 March which focused on events to the south of Europe and the eurozone, Mr Van Rompuy said leaders want Gaddafi to step down and are very concerned about the situation but couldn't reach agreement on what steps should be taken. Given the humanitarian crisis caused by those fleeing the events in Libya, he called for more resources for the EU border agency Frontex, "to protect our common European border".
Liberal leader Guy Verhofstadt was very critical of the EU. "We can't change things in Japan but we can in Libya, where there are heroes sacrificing their lives for freedom and democracy. What are we doing to prevent a new Rwanda or Darfur...we are sending fact finding missions to Tripoli. This attitude makes me sick." He said he is not counting on the EU but on France, UK and the US.
Mr Daul: "It is our duty to guide them in change" and the message should not be of fear, introspection or egoism; it should be of "solidarity". He went on to say "we want Gaddafi to step down and have an end to violence. Given the speed of events EU must be able to act quickly...and speak with a single voice."
Rebecca Harms (Greens/EFA) asked if we are certain that we do not have European companies dealing with Gaddafi? We did not stand up against Mubarak or Ben Ali - mistakes crystallising our inability to take action. "Weakness the international community will not forget and for which we will not be forgiven."
For the EFD Nigel Farage however, told Mr Van Rompuy "I hope you will resist the calls for military action as there is no consent for it" It's easy to get into a war, it's not so easy to get out, he noted. Mr Bisky noted that Libya is also a man made catastrophe. The fragile shoots of democracy in the region can also be destroyed if the situation in Libya gets worse. "In the past the EU has cooperated with dictatorships because of realpolitik. EU needs to win back its credibility." EU sanctions must be ruthlessly implemented, first of all the ban on the sales of weapons.
Jan Zahradil for the ECR said "countries are not the same, Egypt is not Libya...Therefore we must adjust our responses; there is no one size fits all in this case". He went on. "I am sorry to hear that the EU cannot take action. I will be interested to see what the Council and the Commission will do when Gaddafi wins. Back to business as usual?"
Eurozone
Turning to the euro pact, Mr Van Rompuy said that measures to offset economic imbalances within the EU now have political backing. "Peer pressure will be added to market and institutional pressure". The idea of a financial transaction tax will be followed up.
Mr Barroso stressed a higher level of economic policy coordination and stronger economic governance is now accepted.
Mr Swoboda said the Council's plans show an improvement but we are far from happy. He said the focus is on stability but "sustainable growth is the condition of getting out of the crisis". EC and Council need to ensure that a financial transaction tax, proposed by EP last week, becomes reality.
20110316STO15690 Video recording of the meeting Hans van Baalen on Japan: "No one knows where it will end" Press release: Stress tests for Europe's atomic power plants after nuclear scare in Japan Migrations arising from instability EU summit conclusions EuroparlTV thematic page on nuclear energy
EN
1
PHOTO
20110316PHT15702.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/player?category=SPECIAL&eventCode=20110316-1330-SPECIAL-UNKN&format=wmv&byLeftMenu=researchotherevents&language=en#anchor1
EN
4
LINK
/en/pressroom/content/20110315IPR15584/html/Stress-tests-for-Europe's-atomic-power-plants-after-nuclear-scare-in-Japan
EN
6
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/ec/119780.pdf
EN
7
LINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/fr/themes/nuclear.aspx
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110314STO15458 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110228STO14485 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
