Heated nuclear debate at EP after Japan disaster
Environment
2011-03-17 - 16:09
On 16 March, Energy Commissioner Günther Oettinger discussed with MEPs on how nuclear safety can be improved in the EU. The EU's 143 nuclear plants will be subject to stress tests that take into account risks as earthquakes, flooding Role of Nuclear power under question The Japanese nuclear accident opened a heated debate in Europe on nuclear energy. Some countries have already decided to do security checks for their nuclear plants and close down the old ones. On 16 March, Energy Commissioner Günther Oettinger discussed with MEPs on how nuclear safety can be improved in the European Union. MEPs also asked questions on the future of energy policy.
Günther Oettinger reminded MEPs of the "mammoth earthquake that shifted Japan's position on the globe" and mentioned the Council meeting on Tuesday during which member states views were different, some saying safety is first (namely for Germany and Austria) and some were opposing this - namely France, Italy and the UK.
However, he said that "there was a common view on the necessity of safety review. The EU's 143 nuclear plants will be subject to stress tests that take into account risks as earthquakes, flooding, aircraft crashes, cyber or terrorist attacks, local electricity supply failure" he said.
The Commissioner said that in the coming weeks, the Commission will start setting the general standards for these tests. The standards should be defined by June and the tests carried in the 2nd half of the year. "Partner countries should be involved and have the same safety standards" he vowed.
The Chair of the Environment Committee Jo Leinen (S&D) congratulated the quick reaction of EU leaders meeting on 15 March, saying that "public opinion expects fast action". However, he asked "what can the Commissioner do, given that you are not responsible?" He went on to say that "the Euratom Treaty has never been amended and maybe it is time to revisit it".
Karl-Heinz Florenz (EPP) commented that "your activity has been very impressive. How do you continue in climate policy? Do you think this could include compulsory efficiency goals?"
British Liberal Chris Davies (ALDE) told the hearing that "in all forms of energy production people die, especially in the coal industry. We do not want as a result to what happened to an old reactor in Japan to end up turning more and more to coal and abandoning our objective of achieving a low carbon economy."
Swedish Green Carl Schlyter asked whether "the Council had considered the possibility of closing down the oldest reactors that don't have the most advanced safety systems? As for the stress tests I hope they include all the production chain, e. g. transport, waste treatment. We should also analyse the plutonium content."
Other questions from MEPs included calls for a move away from Nuclear or at least a moratorium on building new stations. They also asked whether it is conceivable to meet the CO2 emission reduction target by 2050 without nuclear power
Guther Oettinger told the hearing that "member states are still responsible for the energy mix. Brussels can only give advice. For the moment I am concentrating on the powers I have."
He went on to say that "30% of our electricity mix in the EU as a whole comes from nuclear. If, as the Commission suggests, by 2050 we are to emit 80% less CO2, the only way to it is if energy generation is near 0% CO2 emissions."
"I hope the general stress test will be something nearer to reality than the bank stress tests last year. I cannot believe that all the 143 power stations will be approved, there will be a need to reequipping these stations which might be economically and technically impossible" he warned.
20110316STO15692 Environment, Public Health and Food Safety Stress tests for Europe's atomic power plants after nuclear scare in Japan Nuclear energy on EC website
EN
1
PHOTO
20110310PHT15340.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=ENVI
EN
3
LINK
/de/pressroom/content/20110315IPR15584/html/Stress-tests-for-Europe's-nuclear-power-plants-after-nuclear-scare-in-Japan
EN
4
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/energy/nuclear/index_en.htm#
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
