Single Market needs leadership, project bonds and mobility for professionals
Free movement of services
Committees Internal Market and Consumer Protection
2011-03-17 - 09:52
The Single Market needs stronger leadership, project bonds to fund innovative undertakings in energy and transport as well as a European Skills Passport to ease cross-border mobility of workers and professionals, believes the EP Internal Market Committee.
The committee on Wednesday voted on three non-legislative draft resolutions setting out recommendations for the Single Market Act, the wide programme launched by the Commission last October to give a fresh boost to the EU Internal Market.
The three coordinated resolutions on "Governance and Partnership in the Single Market" "A Single Market for Enterprises and Growth" and "A Single Market for Europeans" are the committee's first response to the Single Market Act. Their purpose is to make suggestions for the concrete proposals to be presented by Commissioner Barnier in April.
The relaunch of the single market "is an important area for this committee", committee chair Malcolm Harbour (ECR, UK) reminded MEPs. He stressed that the Single Market Act had come about because it was "asked for by this Parliament and by this committee".
Strengthening governance of the Internal Market
A call for stronger political leadership for the relaunch of the Single Market is a key point of the draft resolution on "Governance and Partnership", prepared for the committee by Sandra Kalniete (EPP, LV) and adopted by 24 votes to 1, with 12 abstentions. It suggests that the President of the Commission should be given a mandate to coordinate and supervise the relaunch of the Single Market in close cooperation with the President of the European Council and Member States' authorities.
The committee believes that the use of regulations instead of directives, where appropriate, would contribute to a clearer regulatory environment and calls on the Commission to immediately launch infringement procedures where pre-litigation problem-solving mechanisms fail.
Enterprises and growth
The creation of EU project bonds to support long-term innovation and job creation and to finance the implementation of major cross-border infrastructure projects in the areas of energy, transport and telecommunications is a central plank of the draft resolution on "A Single Market for Enterprises and Growth" by Christian Buşoi (ALDE, RO), which was approved by 24 votes to 0, with 13 abstentions.
This resolution also calls on the Commission and Member States to boost the confidence of businesses and citizens in online trading. In addition, MEPs urge the Commission to make public procurement procedures more effective and less bureaucratic.
Placing citizens at heart
"Efforts to complete the Single Market need to concentrate on the concerns and rights of citizens, consumers, public service users and businesses and bring them tangible benefits in order to regain their full confidence in the Single Market", argues the draft resolution on a "Single Market for Europeans" by António Fernando Correia De Campos (S&D, PT), which was adopted by 21 vote to 3, with 14 abstentions.
This resolution calls for better recognition of professional qualifications across borders and the establishment of a European Skills Passport, an extension of the existing roaming regulation in order to reduce costs and introduce caps on prices for data roaming, improved coordination of the activities of national market surveillance and customs authorities to improve the effectiveness of border controls on imports from non-EU countries, greater transparency and comparability of banking charges and full portability of pension rights.
A compromise amendment tabled by the S&D, Greens/EFA and GUE groups calling for "the inclusion of a social policy reference to be foreseen in relevant EU legislation" as well as a proposal calling on the Commission and Member States to secure "social services of general interest" were voted down. Proposals from the S&D calling for a revision of the posting of workers directive also fell.
This in the end caused the S&D to abstain on the final votes on all three resolutions, while the Greens and GUE voted against this one resolution.
Next steps
The three resolutions will be tabled to plenary in Strasbourg in early April. On 13 April, Commissioner Barnier is expected to present the concrete initiatives and steps to relaunch the Single Market, narrowing down the Commission's initial 50 proposals.
In the Chair: Malcolm Harbour (ECR, UK)
20110314IPR15478 Website of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection (IMCO) Watch the meeting
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=IMCO
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/live/live-program?language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
