Beyond economic governance: the EU needs new growth model
Economic and monetary affairs
Committees Financial, Economic and Social Crisis
2011-03-29 - 14:43
A European Treasury, tax harmonisation, euro bonds and increased EU expenditure to finance investments in research and development, infrastructure and energy projects is needed to ensure the EU's future competitiveness and sustainable growth, suggests the first draft of what is to become the final report by Committee on Financial, Economic and Social Crisis, tabled in committee on Monday.
"The EU is in need of a quantum leap forward to deepen political union and economic integration", says the draft report prepared by Pervenche Berès (S&D, FR) and tabled in committee on Monday.
The draft seeks to outline the committee's recommendations for a sustainable EU growth model to tackle the crisis. It has implications for the forthcoming EU economic governance reform, the EU 2020 strategy, fiscal and budgetary policy, financial regulation and supervision, and even for reform of global governance and the EU's representation worldwide.
Economic governance
Specifically, the draft report calls for the development of a European Treasury and euro bonds, a shift towards tax harmonisation within the EU, the transformation of the G20 into a new Economic Security Council and the setting up of a new international monetary system to tackle global imbalances.
Speaking for the EPP group, Frank Engel (LU) described current economic governance proposals as a "step forwards", but added that "Europe is not only in need of economic governance".
Invest in R&D
The EU's next multi-annual financial framework (long-term budget) should aim to boost EU expenditure to meet the EU 2020 strategy targets, says the draft report. In particular, new investments should promote a knowledge-based economy, research and development, innovation, job creation and infrastructure and energy projects.
"Prioritising education" as the "feedstock for research and development" could be "the centrepiece for a European model vis-à-vis the rest of the world" said Sergio Cofferatti (S&D, IT).
"Everybody talks about 'austerity measures' but the European Parliament. Is this wise?", asked Olle Schmidt (ALDE, SE), adding on the issue of education that "perhaps we shouldn't send the message that we are taking away responsibility from the local level", but instead looking for "added value at EU level".
Getting citizens on board
Pascal Canfin (Greens/EFA, FR), warned that "the lack of acceptance of European policies" and the "Member States' lack of implementing powers" could lead to a "new crisis".
"If we are building Europe through the crisis, it needs democratic legitimacy", said Nikolaos Chountis (GUE, EL), adding that it might be "difficult to get people to sign up to so something which is causing such pain".
"The crisis is not over", stressed Committee Chair Wolf Klinz (ALDE, DE), arguing that it had now become a political one. "To get citizens on board, we need to be clear on what citizens can get back" he concluded.
Next steps
The deadline for tabling amendments to the draft report by Pervenche Berès is 13 April. The draft will be put to a committee vote on 30 May, and a plenary one in July.
In the Chair: Committee Chair Wolf Klinz (ALDE, DE)
Procedure: own-initiative report
20110328IPR16528 Website of the Special Committee on Financial, Economic and Social Crisis Watch webstreaming live
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=CRIS
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/live/live-program?language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
