War correspondents: call for braver EU protection policy
Human rights
Committees Human Rights
2011-05-03 - 11:48
Ways to improve protection for journalists reporting on armed conflicts were debated by the Human Rights Sub-Committee on Monday, with a view to "press freedom" day on 3 May.
"Truth is the first casualty of war. That is the reason journalists have to be there and report war crimes on both sides", said Barbara Lochbihler (Greens/EFA, DE). In the debate, MEPs highlighted the crucial role played by the internet in these conflicts and the growing repression of bloggers. Véronique De Keyser (S&D, BE), stressed the key role played by journalists and local observers. "Their work is irreplaceable for us, but what can we do behind our desks, from the EP, to protect them better?", she asked.
"International rules already exist to protect journalists in conflict regions, but they are not always enforced", said Reporters without Borders representative Olivier Basile, adding that the EU could do more to protect them. "Journalists who get arrested still don't have enough diplomatic support, as was shown in Egypt", he said. French war correspondent Anne Nivat added that journalists need help most when they return. "There have to be some conditions guaranteed, such prior training and especially psychological support when they come back", she said.
Jean Paul Marthoz, Professor of international journalism at the University of Louvain, called on the EU institutions to introduce a "more daring" policy to protect the right to press freedom.
Role of ICT companies
Marietje Schaake (ALDE, NL), noted that the struggle for human rights is moving online. "Bloggers are imprisoned and people are tortured for their passwords. The EU needs to become a global leader to defend and promote internet freedom, to allow free speech, press freedom and access to information", she said, highlighting the role of western information and communication technology (ICT) companies "which sometimes can become state media, like the role played by Vodafone in Egypt. The company first shut down all its communication services at the request of the Egyptian government but later did send text messages to its customers that were dictated by that same government. I have asked for an inquiry into the potential role that EU-based ICT companies played in the violation of human rights. Governments and businesses must work together to defend human rights".
Finally, Sub-Committee Chair Heidi Hautala (Greens/EFA, FI), advocated paying more attention to the "repressive laws which are being adopted by authoritarian regimes in the name of fighting against terrorism".
In the chair : Heidi HAUTALA (Greens/EFA, FI)
20110502IPR18527 Sub-Committee on Human Rights Catch up via Video On Demand (VOD)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=DROI
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/search-committees?language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
