Economic governance package explained
Economic and monetary affairs
2012-03-05 - 17:19
A €100 note in slices In autumn 2010 the EU agreed to tighten financial supervision in the private sector in an effort to head off any future financial crisis. A year later the public sector was under the spotlight as the EP tackled dangerous imbalances in EU economies and considered new rules meant to limit the growth of debt and deficits in the member states. On 28 September 2011 MEPs finally approved the so-called "six- pack" of new rules. Read on to find out more about its passage through Parliament.
In April 2011 the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee adopted the six proposals making up the economic governance package. Four of the proposals aim to strengthen the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) and budgetary surveillance, while the remaining two focus on monitoring and controlling macro-economic imbalances within the EU.
Parliament adopted its position on the package in June last year, but held back from a final vote to allow negotiations with member states to continue in the hope of reaching an agreement by the July plenary. That proved to be impossible until mid-September when negotiators finally came up with a deal, which then went to the whole EP.
Our feature outlines the key issues and stages of the package.
In the first section you will find the press release following the final vote in plenary, we also have an interview with the Economic Committee Chair Sharon Bowles and explanations about the package from the MEPs responsible for guiding the six proposals through the EP.
A common timeframe for discussing for Eurozone member budgets and offering troubled countries a version of corporate bankruptcy protection rules are in the pipeline for 2012 and on February 28 Parliament started discussing the relevant proposals from the Commission.
20110429FCS18371
The two-pack initiative: stepping up budgetary surveillance in the Eurozone
Euro coin The EP is currently considering the so-called two-pack, which are two proposals for stepping up financial discipline within the Eurozone. Draft reports by two MEPs propose amending them so that Commission's surveillance powers are more closely controlled and eurozone members in financial difficulties could be placed under bankruptcy style legal protection.
The two-pack builds on the six-pack, a group of economic governance regulations that entered into force on 13 December 2011. The six-pack aims to restore economic stability in the EU by reducing competitiveness and macro-economic imbalances between member states as well as creating strict rules on public debt, sustainable public spending and better surveillance. The Commission has now proposed the two-pack in order to step up surveillance of eurozone members' national budgets and have more oversight of the economic policy plans of those that are in financial difficulties. The Parliament and the Council will now need to approve the two proposals and agree on possible amendments. This why members of the EP's economic and monetary committee produced reports on each of the two proposed regulations. The committee is expected to vote on the two regulations in May and the two reports will then form the basis for further negotiations with the Council, which represents national governments. Commission monitoring The report on monitoring draft budgetary plans by the Portuguese Social-Democrat Elisa Ferreira supports a more active role for the Commission but at the same time calls for a close supervision of their supervisory powers. She said: "There is a need for some rebalancing of powers to allow for more national ownership and a better democratic process." Countries that have adopted the euro should consult the Commission and other members of the eurozone before adopting any major economic and fiscal policy reform plans with potential spillover effects. They should submit their plans to the Commission for monitoring in advance of the plans becoming binding. However, Ms Ferreira says the Commission should not automatically be entrusted with the power to ask a country to change its budget plans. In addition she stresses that deficit reduction timetables should be extended in cases of severe economic downturns to allow breathing room for fostering growth. Bankruptcy protection The report by the French Christian-Democrat Jean-Paul Gauzès looked at the proposal for strengthening economic and budgetary surveillance of eurozone countries experiencing serious financial problems. It states that the Commission could decide to place a country under legal protection, after which the Council would have 10 days to repeal this decision. Once placed under such protection, a country could not be declared to have defaulted, its creditors would need to make themselves known to the Commission within two months and loan interests would be frozen. The country in question would have to submit a recovery and debt settlement plan to the Commission and implement adequate measures. Mr Gauzès said such a rule would provide more clarity in scenarios where the country is on the verge of a default. "It would provide a good substitute to the current ad hoc methods which vary case by case." Six-pack European Commission explaining proposed two legislations Draft report by Jean-Paul Gauzès Draft report by Elisa Ferreira Economic governance plans explained Growth strategy under the microscope
Parliament gives green light to future economic governance plans
Rapporteur Sylvie Goulard answering questions from the press after the vote Eurozone members will no longer be able simply to ignore Commission warnings to correct their budgetary policies. The economic governance legislation voted in plenary on Wednesday should also help ensure that countries tackle unsound economic policies more promptly, considerably increases transparency and accountability and will improve the compilation of statistics to make them more reliable and accurate.
As expected, the plenary vote was tight with left-of-centre groups abstaining and voting against some parts of the deal for fear that the package is overly focused on budgetary correction, to the detriment of growth and employment. On the part of the package dealing with macroeconomic imbalances, a large majority was obtained because centre-left groups felt that an adequate balance had been struck between social and financial imperatives.
ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet had congratulated EP negotiators a week earlier for resisting attempts to water down the package: "If I compare the deal to the initial proposals, there is substantial improvement. I have to pay homage to the Parliament for this."
More details on the deal are available in an FAQ published separately.
Less horse trading, more responsibility
The vote came two weeks after certain Member States, led by France, climbed down from their insistence that a warning to a country would require approval by the Council. MEPs feared that this would lead to back-room deals in which countries needing to reform their budgetary policies would be let off the hook.
Instead, the agreement will force Eurozone governments to muster a majority to block a warning being issued. Neither can the governments opt to do nothing, since such a warning will in any event be issued if the vote is not taken within 10 days of it being proposed by the Commission. And if governments do vote to reject a warning, they will need to explain themselves to the European Parliament in public.
Public hearings and macroeconomic surveillance
Parliament also won the right to invite finance ministers from countries that have received a warning to hearings. Member States long insisted that this should not be the case.
MEPs also negotiated that the Commission would look not only at countries with a trade deficit, but also at those running current account surpluses, when investigating the sources of macroeconomic instability. Member States had initially insisted that only current account deficit countries would be investigated. The agreed rules will therefore require the Commission to consider the possibility that countries like Germany or the Netherlands are a cause of instability and reforms could be asked of them too.
Other improvements by Parliament
Apart from the issues settled, many other improvements were brought about by pressure from MEPs.
Some of the most important improvements are:
putting into law the European semester (annual assessment of national budgets for economic policy coordination), through its inclusion in the legal texts. This will give the procedure much more weight and bite,
establishing a legal framework for the surveillance of the national reform programmes
increased powers for the Commission, which can ask for more information to be supplied to it than envisaged in the original proposals and through on the spot checks to Member States,
A new fine (0.2% GDP) for Eurozone members which supply fraudulent statistics with regard to data on deficits and debt,
an interest-bearing deposit sanction (0.1% GDP) for Eurozone members in cases where a Member State fails to act on recommendations to rectify a macroeconomic imbalance.
greater independence of statistical bodies and standards for the compilation of statistics, and
safeguarding social bargaining processes and wage setting agreements when delivering recommendations.
Background: the package in a nutshell
Firstly, the "six-pack" gives more bite to the current stability and growth pact (SGP), so as to control deficits and debt levels better and from an earlier stage.
Secondly, it innovates, by aiming to oblige policy makers to act swiftly to restore the health of economies that are threatened by macro-economic imbalances, such as house-price bubbles or loss of competitiveness. Both these aims are to be achieved through preventive action, primarily warnings, and corrective action, in the form of sanctions.
Thirdly, the rules aim to ensure that the statistics vital to sound budgetary policy-making and budget monitoring are more accurate, inter alia by having them gathered more independently.
Besides these three key goals, the "six-pack" is also designed, specifically at the insistence of MEPs, to improve transparency and accountability across the board and to increase the powers of the Commission.
Results:
Wortmann Kool report: 354 in favour, 269 against, 34 abstentions
Feio report: 363/268/37
Ferreira report: 554/90/21
Goulard report: 352/237/67
Haglund report: 394/63/206
Ford report: 442/185/40
Procedure: Co-decision, Consultation and inter-institutional non-legislative procedure Frequently asked questions
Wortmann-Kool: economic governance pillar of EU's competitiveness
Ms Wortmann-Kool Reining in spend-thrift governments and making sure macroeconomic imbalances do not undermine economic growth are the two main goals of the economic governance package on which the Parliament and the Council tentatively agreed 20 September . We talked to parliament's lead negotiator Dutch Christian Democrat Corien Wortmann-Kool ahead of a vote in plenary on 28 September. who said the package does not focus only on reducing debt but also provides incentives for growth-friendly reforms and policies.
What has the Parliament achieved in negotiations?
The EP achieved a much stronger surveillance procedure in the stability and growth pack in order to ensure sustainable public finance in the member states and prevent us from having another Greek debt crisis. One of the last stumbling blocks was the EP's request to introduce reverse qualified majority voting (eurozone governments would have to come up with a qualified majority to reject the Commission recommendation or it would be automatically adopted) to trigger sanctions for governments that haven't taken the necessary steps to cut public debt. The EP got agreement on that for all decisions in the framework of the Stability and Growth pact.
The economic governance package is an important pillar to boost EU competitiveness, because its aim is not only to limit the unsustainable debt burden but also to provide strong incentives for the reforms and policies needed (to boost growth).
Why push austerity, if public debt wasn't the cause, but the consequence of the crisis?
Those member states with the most prudent fiscal policies and growth strategies are now performing best. This is proof that fiscal stability leads to growth and employment.
We should put in place the necessary safeguards on our financial markets by further strengthening the European financial supervisors, ensuring more transparency on our financial markets and by establishing a European crisis mechanism for the banking sector. In addition, a number of further measures such as a financial transaction tax and Eurobonds are being studied.
Economists warn that macroeconomic imbalances arise from excessive surpluses as well as excessive deficits, but it seems that deficit countries like Greece and Spain are getting all the flak, while surplus countries are let off the hook
The EP managed to secure a balanced approach with regard to "intelligent symmetry" pointing at both deficit and surplus countries. Nevertheless, we should keep in mind that the need for policy action is particularly pressing in member states showing persistently large current-account deficits and competitiveness losses.
Disagreements remain between the political groups with left-of-centre groups fearing that the package is too closely focused on austerity , to the detriment of growth and employment. FAQ on the economic governance "six pack" More about Ms Wortmann-Kool EuroparlTV interview with Ms Ferreira about the economic governance "six-pack"
Economic governance: Parliament seals its position ahead of European Council
The six rapporteurs: (L-R) Elisa Ferreira, Diogo Feio, Vicky Ford, Sylvie Goulard, Corien Wortmann-Kool, Carl Haglund The EP plenary adopted its position on the economic governance six-pack on Thursday, insisting on a number of new rules which give more ambition and clout to the Commission's original proposals. More transparency, stronger automatic warnings and sanctions as well as new fines are all part of Parliament's position, although left-of-centre groups argued that this represents too much austerity. Negotiations with the Council will continue with the aim of settling everything by July.
Parts of the package, particularly those dealing with strengthening of the stability and growth pact, went through Parliament today with slim margins, with the S&D, Greens/EFA and GUE/NGL groups voting against because of what they considered to be an excessive focus on fiscal control with little room for continuing vital investment needed for long-term growth and employment. The texts dealing with preventing macro-economic imbalances (overheating economies) garnered significant majorities.
The adopted texts now provide finance ministers and heads of state, ahead of the European Council of 23-24 June, with an official position of the EP as a whole. This position will form the backbone of the talks between MEPs and Member States, which are set to continue in earnest in order to reach a final deal as soon as possible. Parliament held back from a final procedural vote today, precisely to allow time for further negotiation. MEPs could take that final vote in July, provided a deal has been hammered out with Council.
Important points emerging from the vote
The adopted texts contain a range of improvements extracted by MEPs during the latest negotiation session concluded with the Hungarian presidency last week. They do not include Ecofin's proposals made on Monday, deemed insufficient by the rapporteurs. Among the new points are:
Increased use of reversed qualified majority voting (RQMV) to make warnings and sanctions more automatic. This is particularly the case regarding the declaration that a Member State has taken no corrective action to remedy identified macroeconomic imbalances.
More transparency by making public more texts and discussions than previously envisaged. Also through the involvement of the EP and national parliaments in holding Member States to account.
Codification of the European semester into the legal texts, thereby giving legal weight to this procedure.
Increased powers for the Commission through requiring more information to be supplied to it than previously envisaged and through surveillance missions to Member States.
A new fine (0.5% GDP) for fraudulent statistics with regard to data on deficits and debt.
An interest bearing deposit sanction (0.1% GDP) in the event of a Member State not acting upon recommendations to rectify a macroeconomic imbalance.
Increased independence of statistical bodies.
More detail on indicators to be used for checking for macroeconomic imbalances to ensure that the Commission does not only look at pure economic indicators but also keeps the social dimension in mind.
Safeguarding of social bargaining processes and wage setting agreements.
Revision clause on Eurobonds (Eurosecurities). By the end of 2011 Commission to prepare a report and possibly legislative proposals.
Pending issues also in the six-pack adopted in plenary
Although there is as yet no firm agreement with Member States on the following points, they also feature in the texts adopted on Thursday by MEPs:
No agreement yet on automatically issuing declarations to Member States which disregard Commission warnings on expenditure overshoots. This automaticity is provided in the adopted texts since it is considered as the door to imposing sanctions and therefore can provide a real incentive to a country to rectify its situation. The inserted clause reduces the power of the Deauville deal coined by France and Germany to keep a firm grip on Commission assessments of non-compliance.
Hearing of finance ministers by the EP. The drafting proposed by the plenary would see the EP "offer the opportunity to the Member State concerned (...) to participate in an exchange of views".
A reference to the need to look at high surplus current account countries (like Germany) as well as countries with deficit current accounts (high import countries) when evaluating the causes of a macroeonomic imbalance.
Results of votes
Prudent fiscal policy and economic policy coordination (Wortmann-Kool report): 333 in favour/303 against/26 abstentions
Speeding up and clarifying the implementation of the excessive deficit procedure (Feio report): 339/304
Sanctions related to breaches of the stability and growth pact rules (Goulard report): 336/269/58
Preventing and correcting macroeconomic imbalances (Ferreira report): 551/88/29
Sanctions related to macroeconomic imbalances (Haglund report): 368/80/209
Standards for national budgetary frameworks (Ford report): 468/156/48
Procedure: Codecision & Consultation
Debate: Wednesday 22 June
Vote: Thursday 23 June Profile of rapporteur Diogo Feio (EPP, PT) Profile of rapporteur Elisa Ferreira (S&D, PT) Profile of rapporteur Carl Haglund (ALDE, FI) Profile of rapporteur Sylvie Goulard (ALDE, FR) Profile of rapporteur Vicky Ford (ECR, UK)
Preventing, fixing macro-economic imbalances
Demonstration May 27, 2011 in front of the Greek Parliament against a new austerity package©BELGA/AFP/A.Messinis The current economic and financial crisis can be explained partly by economic imbalances between Member States and within the private sector. To prevent and correct those imbalances at an earlier stage, Parliament proposes a new early warning mechanism as part of the package on economic governance. We asked some MEPs to explain further.
Why does it matter if member states' economies differ?
"Given that we share the same currency, if we end up in a situation in which we have social imbalances in one country, it will impact everyone's economy," Belgian Green Philippe Lamberts said.
Greek GUE/NGL member Nikolaos Chountis notes "when you are a member of an economic and monetary union, which faces huge structural problems, every macroeconomic imbalance (either surplus or deficit), implies extreme socioeconomic inequalities. For example it is employees in the peripheral countries, who are affected by the austerity measures, and workers in Germany, who have had to deal, for decades now, with salary stagnation."
But are those imbalances to blame for the current crisis in the euro-zone?
"No single factor can be seen as the cause for the crisis, but the macroeconomic imbalances in member states have contributed to the poor state of public finances in certain countries," according to Carl Haglund , who drafted the report on enforcement measures to correct excessive macroeconomic imbalances in the euro area. "For example, Portugal has struggled with low competitiveness for years and this has contributed to the situation the country is in today. In other countries the roots of the problems can be found in irresponsible lending and unsustainable public finances."
"The crisis results from many factors: housing bubbles in Ireland and Spain; divergences in productivity, for example between Germany and Greece. Labour costs are just a small part of the picture but played a big role for the Germany’s surpluses," said Mr Lamberts.
"Constant monitoring of different indicators of macroeconomic development in the member states, such as house prices, export trends, public and private debt levels would be helpful," said Italian Christian Democrat Herbert Dorfmann . "We will be able to see if something is going wrong."
Mr Haglund sees the surveillance framework "as a tool for the future, aiming at reversing problematic trends before they lead to great economic difficulties. Rightly-targeted measures can prevent imbalances or reverse unsustainable trends."
Elisa Ferreira , who is guiding the report on the prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances through the EP, said, "When the Commission assesses a country's performance it must take into account social factors such as the level of unemployment and investment in education."
"Requiring member states to address their macroeconomic imbalances is not about imposing measures that hurt countries or their citizens and punishing those already under a lot of pressure," said Mr Haglund. "It is more harmful if excessive macroeconomic imbalances are not dealt with, as they can have a drastic effect on the economy as a whole."
What about countries with big surpluses like Finland or Germany?
Countries with current account surpluses must also be included in the checks on economic stresses between countries, Ms Ferreira said. "These countries need to be closely monitored because their surpluses often reflect weaknesses in domestic demand."
Mr Lamberts said, "we can prevent such imbalances by making sure that productivity and development fall more into line between member states, but also in the way wages and power are distributed. In Germany, the price of labour has been kept artificially low. Much of the surplus has been produced at the expense of workers."
"We have to recognize that we are collectively responsible, in different ways, to different extents, but no one can claim to be perfect and say that it is all someone else's fault," he added. Haglund report Ferreira report
Do you remember what caused the financial crisis?
Lehman Brothers employee carrying a box EU countries are currently trying to fix the crisis in the euro zone. But what, deep down, caused the crisis? What key lessons should we learn? Well, part of the problem was that member states did not stick to the rules on debt and deficits. The Parliament thinks the time has come for them to do so. Here, in under 60 seconds, is why.
You will also find links to audiovisual information about the economic governance package, as well as videos on EuroparlTV and a link to the press conference following the vote on the package in the Economics Committee Audiovisual page on economic governance Economic governance on EuroparlTV Press conference following the Committee vote Watch the video
Economics Committee chair on economic governance package: big shock for Council
ITW with MEP Sharon Bowles While member states are trying to fix the crisis in some euro-zone countries, Parliament is already focusing on preventing this happening in the future. It is focusing on a package of measures to better monitor member state budgets and deficits and measures to determine and repair imbalances between EU economies. We put a few questions on the economic governance package to Economics Committee Chair Sharon Bowles, who is currently negotiating with member states, ahead of a vote in plenary.
What does Parliament want to achieve with this package?
Most important is the transparency issue, which also means the accountability of the member states. We want to apply reversed qualified majority voting (Council would have to vote to stop measures being imposed on members that do not correctly apply Stability and Growth Pact rules rather than vote in favour, making it easier to get the measures approved) as the normal process for economic governance measures.
The European Central Bank agrees with us on this, wanting to increase the automaticity of decisions. The reason is simple; we do not trust the Council because in the past the bigger member states like France and Germany have not applied the rules. We want to be sure this cannot happen again in the future.
Then there is the issue of the fines. They are important, although we are not fond of countries that are already in trouble needing to pay a fine. Our preference is that when a country is not doing well, the situation is fixed at an earlier stage, but if action is not taken after the need is clearly indicated, fines are the ultimate sanction. Where fines are applied we would rather they were put to a common cause like the European Investment Bank than given to better off member states.
It is also very important to ensure the professional independence of statistics and audits about a country's financial situation.
How important is the transparency issue?
Very important. Information relating to off-balance sheet as well as on-balance sheet exposures is necessary. Furthermore, people need to know what is going on in their own country and in Council, especially if some kind of action or recommendation that might affect them is likely. We want the member states, their parliaments and their citizens to have ownership of this project of budgetary cooperation.
Isn't there a danger that austerity measures will hinder growth and recovery?
The package does not prescribe austerity, but that is a consequence if large fiscal adjustments have to be made. This is a big part of the debate and the area where there is a difference of opinion in the Parliament. However, all reports are about stimulation and growth which is why we are pushing for the inclusion of the 2020 strategy in all the factors that are taken into consideration. The majority in the Parliament takes the view that there is enough flexibility in the Stability and Growth Pact for structural reforms, but to discount all investment that might reduce expenditure in the future from the balance sheet is too uncertain.
Are imbalances to blame for the current crisis in the euro-zone?
Well, the imbalances have not helped. In the future, this is something we need to be able to address. The countries that have a large surplus have some responsibility through the effect on the economy and interest rate decisions or through their bank lending and investment policies in the countries that are now in trouble. That is why this not just a problem for the countries that are in trouble. We are all in this together and have to find solutions.
.
Can member states claim the political groups in the EP cancel each other out?
No, the vote for the package in committee was electronic so we know what the majority was for every single amendment and in most things we were together. Where we did differ, the majority was still substantial, not marginal, and that is the basis of our mandate for negotiating. The Council is in the same position; they do not have unanimity either.
What do you hope Member States have learnt since the tough negotiations with the EP on the financial supervision package?
Well, we have had co-decision on financial services for many years and have always had battles. What is new here is that we have co-decision in an area of budgetary surveillance. It was perhaps a bit of a shock for the Council to realise we have a role. However, they changed the Treaty and gave us this role. In fact in this package, there are 4 legislative proposals for which we have co-decision. Two are not co-decision but we are in the position to sell this to the Council as a package. So we want the Council to consider our point of view for the reports of Ford and Ferreira as well. They need to negotiate with us on the package as a whole.
Do you expect an agreement with Council before summer?
I certainly hope so. We have already been through all the proposals once in trialogue so we have started to work out where we are close and where we differ. Drafting suggestions are already being exchanged.
You could say we have divided the issues into the good, the bad and the ugly. The good are where we agree already, the bad where we can find a compromise and the ugly where we are far apart and maybe we will need to give in on some points and the Council on others. The committee gave us a clear mandate to try to get a first reading agreement. However, we do not want a deal at any cost.
The vote on the package is planned for the June plenary in Strasbourg.
Profile Sharon Bowles Economics Committee
EP committee wants stricter adherence to debt, deficit rules
empty cash box The vote was tight on 19 April when the Economics Committee considered the economic governance package. The Parliament wants to give the European Commission a stronger role in controlling member states that break EU rules on debts and deficits. However, some MEPs were concerned that tougher rules on debt could limit investment and jeopardise economic growth.
We asked the MEPs dealing with the proposals on the reform of the Stability and Growth Pact to explain further.
What problems do high deficits and debt cause?
"Problems with high deficits and debts can easily escalate. When concerns arise that the country may not be able to repay its debt, financing costs increase," British Conservative Vicky Ford, who drafted the report on budgetary surveillance, explained. "This is an even bigger concern for countries in a common currency, like the euro. Bound by a common interest rate, Greece, for example, cannot devalue its currency to regain some competitiveness, or seek to inflate away its debt burden."
"History has recently shown us that the member states with higher growth rates and the best performances are also the ones with the lowest deficit and debt," said. Diogo Feio, the Portuguese draftsman on the excessive deficit procedure.
Why didn't the old rules for the deficit procedure work?
Dutch Christian Democrat Corien Wortmann-Kool, responsible for steering the proposals on the coordination of economic policies through the EP, said, "it actually went wrong in 2003 when France and Germany violated the budget rules, but the Council accepted the situation. So, later it was difficult to impose discipline on other countries."
Won't austerity measures endanger growth and hurt the economy?
"You can have austerity measures in some fields and not cut the spending that is necessary for the future. There must be a fair burden of measures; they need to be shared fairly between rich and poor," French Liberal Sylvie Goulard, the rapporteur for budgetary surveillance in the euro area, said.
"The public debt is a millstone around the neck of members. If we don't solve this, it will be a heavy burden for future generations. The interest that needs to be paid is putting a brake on economic growth. Reducing it will provide financial room for investment, Ms Wortmann-Kool said.
Ms Ford said, "there is certainly a delicate balance to be struck between managing debt levels and promoting growth. However, trying to spend your way out of a crisis is not a miracle solution."
"We fear that only talking about sticks and not talking about carrots is going to ruin countries and the European economy as a whole," said German Socialist Udo Bullmann, who is following the coordination of economic policies for the Socialists. "The Pact as it stands does not distinguish between whether an investment is for today or tomorrow, for instance if a government invests public money in buying weapons or in building a new educational system. Our proposal is that the Commission should distinguish such 'good spending'."
Avoid fines....
"The purpose of this legislation is not to punish. It is to make clear that rules have to be respected and to have some deterrent sanctions in order to avoid states going too far," said Ms Goulard. "We have to prevent big deviations; we need to intervene at a very early stage."
"Fines are only levied if a country fails to take the required action to redress the situation, not simply because such a situation exists," Ms Ford noted, while Mr Feio said, "We want to create an efficient system that avoids further punishment. We want problems to be spotted early and immediately corrected since the future of the EU lies in the stability and growth of all its members and not just a few."
...by letting transparency do the work
"We need to make peer pressure more efficient. The idea is to have a cross-border public discussion at a point where it is easier to correct something. Peer pressure behind closed doors has simply not worked," Ms Goulard said.
"Reports about missions to the member states should be made public and we need reporting to the European Parliament to have a public debate. This will put some pressure on the countries to comply with the rules," said Ms Wortmann-Kool.
And there are other sanctions like public warnings and recommendations before having recourse to fines, Ms Ford added.
Tough negotiations ahead
"At the current stage we are still in negotiations with the European Commission and the Council and although we still have a long a way to go I believe we will be able to reach a common understanding that will prove adequate for the EU," Mr Feio said.
But Mr Bullmann is less sanguine. "I am totally dissatisfied with what is on the table. The package as it stands at the moment is unjust, ineffective and it is the opposite of what we need to modernise our economies," he said. We will come back with our proposals especially for the Wortmann-Kool report to prevent a pure austerity concept from coming into existence." Press release on committee vote
Economic governance: MEPs demand tougher sanctions for excessive deficits
Stethoscope sitting on a €10 bill 6 proposals on new economic rules aim to curb imbalances, reckless government spending 2000 amendments from MEPs Despite an encouraging, but fragile, recovery in the past couple of months, MEPs haven't lost sight of the continuing economic and social hardship in the European Union. On 19 April, MEPS from the Economic Committee backed a legislative package introducing tougher sanctions to address the root causes of the crisis: a worrying build-up of economic imbalances within European economies and the propensity of governments to finance spending by getting deeper into debt.
MEPs tabled over 2000 amendments to the six legislative proposals in the European Commission's economic governance package , calling for a tougher regime to deal with spendthrift member states than that proposed by the Commission. The main points are:
the Commission should have a more important role in the surveillance of, and decisions on excessive deficits, vis-à-vis the Council, so that member states have less room for manoeuvre
countries caught cooking their accounts (reporting false statistics on debt etc.) should face a fine of 0.5% of GDP
sanctions for failing to take action on macroeconomic imbalances (0.1% GDP) should kick in earlier, at the first failure to respect recommendations; if failure is persistent, a fine could be increased to 0.3% of GDP
Council votes on imposing deposits and fines should be held in public, except in crisis situations, when decisions can be taken behind closed doors
MEPs also demand that the Commission allow member states to continue making investments that would be beneficial to their long-term health. There is a fear among MEPs that growth and jobs are being left out of the recent legislative packages. Quite a few MEPs have warned that cutting deficits in the face of recession might prolong and deepen it.
The approved texts also give a stronger legal backing to the European economic semester, some elements of the Euro Pact, and the National Reform Programme (NRP) procedures.
Diagnosis: crisis as a consequence of economic imbalances, exploding debt
Two complementary problems are seen as at the root of Europe's economic crisis - reckless government spending and economic imbalances and both can lead to the EU having to step in with emergency loans.
An example of the first case is Greek government spending. To finance spending on wages, investment and social services in excess of tax revenue, the government ran a deficit and borrowed money from banks. When the banks begin to fear loans might not be repaid because of high levels of public debt and recession, they cut back lending and the EU had to step in with emergency loans.
Economic imbalances arise because some countries like Germany have large trade surpluses, while others like Greece and Portugal have large trade deficits. This leads the private sector in countries with a deficit to borrow from countries with a surplus to finance for example a real estate bubble (like those seen in Ireland and Spain). When the bubble bursts, government steps in to save the banks hiking up public debt.
Remedy: curb imbalances, sanction excessive spending
Of the six economic governance proposals, four deal with deficits and debt (reinforcing the existing Stability and Growth Pact) and the other two break new ground, introducing surveillance of macroeconomic imbalances :
strengthening the SGP through more focus on the public debt limit of 60% of gross domestic product. If it is above that, the government has to start reducing it, by 5% a year on average over three years Until now the focus has been mainly on keeping deficits within 3% of GDP. In addition, the aim is to introduce semi-automatic sanctions for countries that fail to meet commitments on debt and deficit. Once proposed, sanctions (of between 0.2-0.5% of GDP) would only be rejected if a majority votes against them - at the moment sanctions require a majority in favour.
curbing imbalances through surveillance of, as yet undecided, national indicators of imbalances and recommendations of action to reduce them. There would be sanctions for countries that failed to comply.
ECB looking to EP for stricter procedures
The European Central Bank is counting on the EP to back stricter procedures on debt and deficits because not all EU countries are strongly in favour of a stronger role for the Commission and automatic sanctions.
The package still has to be voted in plenary. MEPs discuss economic governance with ECB's Trichet European Commission on economic governance Financial glossary on imbalances Commission economic governance package
EN
1
PHOTO
20110502PHT18556.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20120131PHT36656.jpg
EN
4
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/articles/governance/2011-11-23-proposed-reg-strengthening-surveillance-ms-severe-financial-disturbance_en.htm
EN
5
LINK
/sides/getDoc.do?type=COMPARL&reference=PE-483.472&secondRef=01&language=EN
EN
6
LINK
/sides/getDoc.do?type=COMPARL&reference=PE-483.469&secondRef=01&language=EN
EN
9
PHOTO
20110927PHT27642.jpg
EN
11
PHOTO
20110913PHT26566.jpg
EN
13
LINK
/members/expert/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=28167
EN
14
LINK
http://europarltv.europa.eu/en/player.aspx?pid=decec8e6-4ec6-4214-84f7-9f64010da397
EN
15
PHOTO
20110621PHT22056.jpg
EN
16
LINK
/members/expert/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=96977
EN
17
LINK
/members/expert/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=28308
EN
18
LINK
/members/expert/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=96683
EN
19
LINK
/members/expert/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=97137
EN
20
LINK
/members/expert/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=96949
EN
21
PHOTO
20110608PHT20949.jpg
EN
24
PHOTO
20110518PHT19633.jpg
EN
25
LINK
http://audiovisual.europarl.europa.eu/Search.aspx?c=economicgovernanceid
EN
26
LINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/en/themes/theme-1.aspx
EN
27
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/player?eventCode=20110419-1830-SPECIAL-UNKN&language=en&byLeftMenu=researchotherevents&category=SPECIAL&format=wmv#anchor1
EN
28
LINK
http://www.youtube.com/user/EuropeanParliament#p/u/0/QCAQ7YL2o1M
EN
29
PHOTO
20110518PHT19621.jpg
EN
30
LINK
/members/public/yourMep/view.do?name=bowles&partNumber=1&language=NL&id=33570
EN
31
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=NL&body=ECON
EN
32
PHOTO
20110502PHT18544.jpg
EN
34
PHOTO
20110323PHT16285.jpg
EN
36
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/articles/eu_economic_situation/2010-09-eu_economic_governance_proposals_en.htm
EN
37
LINK
/news/public/focus_page/042-72753-001-01-01-907-20100414FCS72750-01-01-2006-2006/default_p001c001_en.htm
EN
38
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/articles/eu_economic_situation/2010-09-eu_economic_governance_proposals_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110920BKG27073 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110429FCS18371 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20120210STO37769 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110920BKG27073 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110920BKG27073 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A7-2011-0182 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A7-2011-0183 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110418IPR18102 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110321STO15977 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FEA DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FEA DOC XML V0//EN
