Investing in education, mobility, and universal childcare
Youth
Plenary sittings
2011-05-12 - 13:02
EU youth mobility programmes need more funding, qualifications should be recognised EU-wide, business-education cooperation should be encouraged, and provision of childcare and early education should be universal, says Parliament in two resolutions passed on Thursday.
"Even in times of economic crisis, financing youth and education should not be considered as a cost to be met now, but as an investment in the future of Europe", stresses a resolution drafted by Milan Zver (EPP, SI).
MEPs welcome the Commission's "Youth on the Move" initiative, and back the EU target of ensuring that at least 40% of young people complete higher or vocational education. They encourage Member States to invest at least 2% of their GDP in higher education. Parliament also calls for stronger dialogue with youth organisations and more youth participation in decision-making.
More effort needed to foster mobility
Funding for EU mobility and youth programmes such as Lifelong Learning (Erasmus, Leonardo da Vinci, Comenius, Grundtvig), Marie Curie, Erasmus Mundus and Youth in Action must be increased from 2013, say MEPs.
Mobility programmes should not be restricted to university students, but be available to vocational students, teachers and youth workers, too, argue MEPs. Parliament believes children should learn two non-native languages from an early age, including those of neighbouring countries. MEPs also call for EU-wide recognition of educational qualifications.
Employability of students and graduates
MEPs advocate more business-education co-operation, to bring university curricula closer to labour market needs, and modernise vocational education. However, higher education should not only ensure employability but also "nurture the creativity and innovativeness of young people and help them to develop intellectually and socially", they add.
Open universities, online education and more flexible university timetables for working students should be encouraged, Parliament says. MEPs also highlight the need to encourage youth entrepreneurship and promote recruitment of young people, given that "unemployment at a young age puts the individual at a very high risk of poverty in the long term".
Tackling discrimination and inequalities
Parliament calls for extra support for disabled young people, young parents and those seeking to get back into education. Gender inequalities in occupational choices should be tackled, it adds, particularly by encouraging girls to take up mathematics, informatics, natural sciences and technology, and boys to take up teaching, caring and social professions.
Universal access to early childhood education and care
In a separate resolution by Mary Honeyball (S&D, UK), passed with 506 votes in favour, 27 against and 55 abstentions, Parliament "calls for the development of a European framework for early childhood education and care services". These services "should ideally be universal to all parents and children regardless of their background or financial status", say MEPs, who urge Member States to introduce a compulsory nursery school year and to provide more advisory services for parents, both at home and in crèches.
Parliament also calls on Member States to recognise the professional qualifications of childhood education and care workers, give them appropriate training and attract more men to the sector. All qualified staff should ideally be paid a salary in line with that of primary school teachers, say MEPs, adding that education and care services "should be fully participative, involving all staff, parents and, where possible, children themselves".
Procedure: Non-legislative resolutions
20110511IPR19218 Adopted texts will be available here (click on 12 May) Profile of rapporteur Milan Zver (Slovenia, EPP) - Youth on the Move Profile of rapporteur Mary Honeyball (S&D, UK) - Early years learning
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/members/expert/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=96933
EN
3
LINK
/members/expert/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=5846
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
