Communicating Europe: showing Parliament in action
Institutions
2011-05-16 - 10:44
Focused on the big picture French-based, European affairs internet portal Toute l’Europe has launched a new website dedicated to the work of the European Parliament. "Parliament in Action" publishes news and background information in French, English and German.
The question of how to communicate Europe at a time of declining electoral participation, financial crisis and internal debate is often mulled over in European capitals. Many have set their hopes on the internet and interactive social networks to re-establish contact with EU citizens.
"It's quite ironic that while we see electoral turnout decreasing, participation on the Internet is increasing," said Toute l'Europe head Jean-Bernard Baudry, when presenting the new site on 11 May in Strasbourg.
Toute l'Europe was set up in 2006 after French and Dutch voters rejected the European Constitution. Backed by a grant from the European Parliament, it has created a second website dedicated to the EP, which will provide editorial coverage of the plenary sessions and interactive graphics on the work and powers of the Parliament.
Unlike the EP's official website, "Parliament in action" won't cover the assembly's legislative work in detail. "We don’t want to get lost in the details of the debate," Emilie Louis, the website’s editor in chief said. "We want citizens to understand the big topics so that they are more interested and participate in the debate."
Readers can use embedded social media tools including Twitter and Facebook to exchange views and a regular chat with an MEP will provide an insider’s perspective on the complicated procedures of one of the world’s largest parliaments.
French EPP member Elisabeth Morin-Chartier said she hopes the new tool will help to show that "the EU works for Europe" and be a tool for MEPs to better understand "what Europe’s citizens want and who they are".
20110513STO19331 Parliament in action site EP on Facebook EP on twitter
EN
1
PHOTO
20110516PHT19388.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://europarliament.touteleurope.eu/
EN
3
LINK
http://www.facebook.com/europeanparliament
EN
4
LINK
http://twitter.com/Europarl_EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
