EUROLAT: MEPs and Latin American MPs close fifth plenary with greater unity on Mercosur and migration
Development and cooperation
General
2011-05-20 - 10:05
EuroLat Co-President José Ignacio Salafranca (EPP, ES) closed the fifth Plenary Assembly in Montevideo (Uruguay) on Thursday with a very positive message on the outcome of the meetings between MEPs and their Latin American counterparts, "which will surely help to push forward negotiations on sensitive agreements like the one with Mercosur".
As a good example of EUROLAT's diplomatic success, Mr Salafranca cited the decision of Paraguay's President Fernando Lugo to attend a meeting with the EP delegations on EuroLat and Mercosur (which includes Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay) in Brussels next Tuesday.
"The diplomatic achievements of this fifth plenary session clearly show that the Eurolat Assembly is consolidating its strength, both politically - as is shown by the presence of Uruguay's President José Mujica, Colombia's Vice-President Angelino Garzón and three ministers at the meetings - and content wise. The fact that we were able to build a constructive and sometimes united approach on problematic issues such as migration, drug trafficking or trade relations will pave the way for future agreements between both regions on these matters", he concluded.
The Eurolat Assembly passed three resolutions on Thursday which set out a road map for stepping up security and defence co-operation, analyse trade relations with the various Latin American regions and propose new measures to promote employment for women and young people.
Trade
"We must overcome our fear of concluding new association agreements, especially now that representatives from both sides are questioning the trade deal with Mercosur. Our experience shows that such agreements bring a broader political co-operation and the gradual opening of markets, always regulated by norms relating to the harmonisation of social, environmental and health standards. And this is good for both parties, for their industries, their productive companies and above all for their civil societies", said rapporteur María Muñiz de Urquiza (S&D, ES).
The Spanish MEP also highlighted the broad consensus achieved on compromise amendments dealing with the most sensitive topics, such as the need to guarantee fair competition among farmers based on common standards and traceability rules for imported agricultural products, all of which she said would help to overcome European farmers' fears about the new trade agreement.
As regards banana trade, the resolution stressed that liberalisation must always be accompanied by compensatory measures for farmers on islands or in outermost regions.
Other key articles called for further trade rules to ensure access to cheap medicines in developing countries, for the protection of indigenous populations and their traditional economies, for support to lift Cuba's trade ban and for every trade agreement to include a section on sustainable development, formulated with the direct involvement of NGOs.
Employment
The resolution on employment added joint proposals to improve the employment prospects of women and young people, combat discrimination and support young entrepreneurs and the self-employed.
Rapporteur Izaskun Bilbao (ALDE, ES), also highlighted the support obtained from both regions for most compromise amendments, especially in these tough economic times for many European countries. The report "sees the crisis as an opportunity to transform the job market, bringing innovation and new types of employment, a low-carbon economy and the extended use of new technologies", she explained.
"The measures proposed aim to fight existing discrimination against women, who in many parts of Latin America are banned from higher education and cannot access the labour market on an equal footing with men. The report calls for awareness-raising campaigns, new measures to reconcile professional and family life, rules to prevent wage inequalities and the regularisation of domestic jobs done by housewives and caretakers of dependent relatives. I am talking here about the need to improve the situation of handicapped people, but also about how to subsidise the care of children, protect women against being fired during their maternity leave and introducing a proper paternity leave", she added.
20110519IPR19824 Euro-Latin American Parliamentary Assembly
EN
1
LINK
/intcoop/eurolat/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
