To the stars…and beyond
Research and innovation
2011-05-26 - 15:49
Pioneer role for Europe ©ESO Space…mankind's never-ending quest to understand the cosmos and its own place in it, has always led us to turn our eyes to the stars, in wonderment and, with technological and scientific progress, a growing understanding of the workings of the universe and, hence, our own world. MEPs, cosmologists and other experts discussed the science and politics of the final frontier in Parliament on 24 May.
The EP's Scientific and Technological Options Assessment panel (STOA) organised a workshop on "Astronomy and Space Sciences - The Map and Evolution of the Universe", with keynote speaker cosmologist and astrophysicist Sir Martin Rees. It was chaired by Italian EPP member Salvatore Tatarella and Spanish Socialist Teresa Riera Madurell . Outside, telescopes were set up to allow visitors to the Parliament to take a peek at our sun.
"Even the least complex thing in the universe is hard to understand," Sir Martin said. Despite all the progress achieved over the past century "what all my colleagues share is the sense of mystery and wonder".
Gazing skywards
Studying the stars, seeing where they are born and how they die is already a huge achievement but the greater challenge is still before us: finding an earth-like planet. ESO, the European Southern Observatory, an intergovernmental organisation that includes 13 EU member states, Brazil and Switzerland, currently operates two huge observatories in Chile. One is the aptly named "Very Large Telescope" in Paranell, which, if all goes according to plan, will be joined after 2020 by the "Extremely Large Telescope", the biggest in the world, the Observatory's director Roberto Gilmozzi explained.
To the stars
Ground-based observation has its limits though and the European Space Agency (ESA), has the answers. Alvaro Giménez, ESA director of Science and Robotic Exploration, spoke of Europe's answer to the Hubble, the Herschel infrared orbital telescope, "the largest telescope ever flown in space" and the upcoming GAIA telescope, which will map the galaxy, plotting the position and course of the stars.
The next generation
Ms Riera noted that "Europe is playing a pioneer role" with "an efficient and well-coordinated astronomy programme" but it is also "our task to make young people aware of the importance of science".
Astronomy is "a unique tool for development" but also a unique tool for inspiring children to take up science, Professor George Miley of Leiden University explained presenting the Dutch Universe Awareness project designed "to introduce young children to the excitement of science".
… and beyond
For Tatarella, "astronomy could lead in a not distant future to huge discoveries and achievements that may also change abruptly our vision of reality".
After all, "the more we understand the more we have to understand" and that applies even at the most fundamental level, Sir Martin said. "Almost all educated people nowadays believe in evolution, but almost everybody thinks we (humans) are the end of the process. No astronomer believes that!"
20110520STO19905 STOA ESO ESA
EN
1
PHOTO
20110518PHT19637.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/stoa/default_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
http://www.eso.org/public/
EN
4
LINK
http://www.esa.int/esaCP/index.html
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
