Reform of the CAP
Agriculture
2011-11-07 - 12:45
CAP in figures - click the image to enlarge Agricultural spending accounts for 41% of the European Union's annual budget and has been at the heart of EU policy since the very start of the European project. As the European Parliament, European Commission and member states begin to haggle over the EU's long-term budget, we look into the role of the Common Agricultural Policy in the so-called Multiannual Financial Framework for 2014-2020.
The last revision of the CAP dates from 2003 but following the accession of 12 new EU countries, it is clear that the EU's agricultural policy must be adapted to face new challenges.
Among the issues to be tackled are: a fairer distribution of money between old and new member states, a structure for direct payments to farmers, the stimulation of greener farming, the guarantee of fair prices for farmers and how best to compete in the global market.
The European Commission presented its proposals for reforming the CAP on 12 October. The EP, the Commission and the Polish Presidency of the Council are preparing an extensive public debate on the future agricultural policy and for the first time 7 November, Agriculture Committee MEPs will meet their co-decision counterparts - farm ministers - and Commissioner Dacian Cioloş, to discuss the proposed reform package. The EP has delegated MEPs to prepare reports on different aspects of the proposals.
Parliament's rapporteurs on c ore reports:
Regulation for direct support schemes for farmers: Luis Manuel Capoulas Santos (Portuguese Socialist)
Regulation on common organisation of markets: Michel Dantin (EPP group, France)
Regulation on support for rural development: Luis Manuel Capoulas Santos
Regulation on financing management and monitoring: Giovanni La Via (EPP group, Italy)
Reports linked to the reform package:
Regulation on transitional measures for 2013: Luis Manuel Capoulas Santos
Regulation on common organisation of markets (vine-growers): Herbert Dorfmann (EPP group, Italy)
This feature will keep you updated on the latest developments in the negotiations on the future CAP.
The reformed farm policy will cover the period from 2014 – 2020.
20110526FCS20313
Professor: EU's agricultural policy needs to become more sustainable
A woman cropping corn salad at an organic farm in Germany Making the EU's Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) more sustainable will be vital for environmental as well as economic reasons, professor Alan Matthews told the EP's agricultural committee. The Commission proposes to reform the CAP in order to introduce more sustainable practices by giving farmers financial incentives to change the way they operate. Professor Matthews, of Trinity College in Dublin, said in a report he presented to the committee on 19 March that doing so was urgently needed.
European Commission proposal The Commission wants to make agriculture in Europe more competitive and sustainable. It proposes to make 30% of the overall direct payments to farmers who meet specific environmental requirements such as farming organically, crop diversification and creating ecological focus areas (see fact box on the right). Allen Matthews's report Professor Matthews examined the proposal's impact and researched possible alternatives. He highlighted several positive elements, such as it not involving additional costs, so there was no need to postpone action on it. The plan would define and fund mandatory green standards for the whole of the EU. Ecological focus areas would help to preserve biodiversity and quality, while targeted measures should be pursued, even if some member states would benefit more from them than others. However, professor Matthews said there were still questions that needed answering, such as would the greening scheme be mandatory for farmers. The proposal indicates there will be two payments: one for green issues and one for general farming support. Why are there two payments? Professor Matthews also said more money should be made available, for example the green aspects could be covered by the EU's long-term budget. He also questioned whether it would be fair as organic farmers are already green by definition. Next steps Together with the Council, the European Parliament will have to approve the proposal. The agricultural committee, which is responsible for drafting a recommendation to MEPs, will discuss the plan again on 27 March. Many MEPs have said there can be no final vote on the reform package without final figures of the EU's long-term budget for 2014-2020. What is an ecological focus area? Ecological focus areas are designed to deliver ecosystem services that also benefit people Biodiversity, water and soil are protected in these areas They are aimed at long-term safety and sustainability of production European Commission wants farmers to keep 7% of their land as ecological focus area Adopted EP position on CAP reform Commission press release Video of the agricultural committee workshop Infographic on the CAP reform Agricultural policy after 2013: greener, fairer, more competitive Commission communication: the CAP towards 2020
De Castro: need for a more flexible and productive CAP
Paolo De Castro History and budget merge in the Common Agricultural Policy, making it one of the most important action plans for the EU. The discussion about the future CAP is not only crucial for farmers but for all European citizens, since it deals with the challenge of food security, Agriculture Committee Chair Paolo De Castro said as negotiations start on a new EU farm policy for 2014-2020.
The main challenge for European farmers will be to "produce more, but pollute less", he said, stressing the importance of a reliable CAP budget in order to meet the challenge of food supply. The Italian Socialist said that the farm budget, which accounts for around 40% of the total EU budget, is modest compared to other big economies: "There are 2 million farmers in the US and their budget is twice as big as the EU's. We have 10 million farmers. We went from 15 to 27 countries with the same budget."
Greening measures could lead to more bureaucracy, less productivity
There has been a widespread criticism of the "greening element" in the European Commission proposal for CAP reform, particularly of setting 7% of farmed land aside for ecological purposes. De Castro fears that the proposal could lead to more bureaucracy, which would be an additional burden for EU farmers. The proposed measures would "keep production down instead of promoting it", he said. "I don't think that this is the best way to increase European agricultural potential because, after all, what we need in the future is to produce more food in a sustainable way. How can I for instance explain to people who produce olive trees that they have to reduce by 7%? Do they have to cut their trees down? I don't think it's the correct way to go."
He also says the Commission proposals will harm flexibility: "We need more flexibility. With 27 member states and 27 types of agriculture; it's not possible to apply the rules in the same way. Not all countries are ready to do that. Some countries need more time to introduce flat rates. The Commission doesn't take into account that the situation is different in different countries; we are not all at the same starting point. Secondly, there is the problem of market measures. We proposed the introduction of new tools (in a June EP resolution), but we don't see any new tools in the proposals."
A fairer distribution between West and East
There are different payment systems in place for the 15 older EU countries and the 12 countries that joined in 2004 and 2007 and these systems need to be aligned. The balancing of views from "older" and "newer" member states has its challenges, De Castro says and in order for talks to progress there will have to be compromises on both sides. "All the new countries want to move faster with the alignment and I agree with them. We want to achieve alignment in the next 20 to 25 years but at the same time we need to maintain equilibrium....A good equilibrium would be to accept Parliament's proposal for the budget. I hope we can find a good solution but a good budget is a precondition."
EP to play a strong role in negotiations
Historically, the EP has had limited influence over agricultural policy, EU farm ministers took decisions based on a Commission proposal and the EP simply gave its opinion, but with the Lisbon Treaty "the EP has the same power as the Council, which means that we need to work together. Without the positive vote of the Parliament, no reform can be approved," De Castro said.
For the first time on 7 November, the 27 farm ministers and the EP's Agriculture Committee members met to discuss the future perspectives of the CAP. De Castro said the meeting was "very important" as it paved the way for better understanding. "I saw we had a lot of points in common with the Council, so we really hope that the Commission and Council will help us to find a good solution for the future of the agricultural sector." Farm policy reform plans debated by ministers and MEPs in Brussels EU farm policy after 2013: Commission proposals welcomed with reservations CAP reform feature Paolo de Castro
Agricultural policy after 2013: greener, fairer, more competitive
Rapporteurs Albert Dess MEPs want to keep the EU agriculture budget unchanged until 2020 so that farmers have incentives to provide secure food supplies, environmental protection, create new jobs and provide for a competitive EU farming sector
Ahead of Commission proposals on the future of the Common Agricultural Policy the Parliament is staking out its position for the next long-term budgetary period, running from 2014 to 2020.
In response to rumours of cuts in aid for rural development, MEPs stressed their support for adequate funding for this area.
"The vote sends a clear, strong signal to the commissioner [Dacian Cioloş] and I hope the Commission will bear in mind what we have put into the report and incorporate it in the final legislative proposal", said Albert Dess (EPP, DE), who drafted the resolution.
Making the CAP greener
If the EU's agriculture policy is to provide both secure supplies of high quality food and contribute to environmental protection and renewable energy, it must be adequately funded, say MEPs, to give farmers an incentive to use modern, environmentally friendly techniques.
Direct payments to farmers should be more directly linked to "greening measures" (low carbon emissions, low energy consumption). An EU wide incentive system, 100% financed by the EU, should be set up to support farmers who go in for sustainable production methods.
Fairer distribution of EU funding
Agricultural funding should be distributed more fairly among Member States and among different categories of farmers. Parliament proposes that each EU country should in the future receive a minimum percentage of the EU average payment. MEPs agree with a ceiling on direct payments per farmer but emphasise that new rules must take the size, employment record and environmental performance of each farm into account.
To avoid misuse of public money, direct payments should be reserved for "active farmers", i.e. those who actually use their land for production.
Stability: speculation, crisis management and farmers' bargaining power
Fighting speculation in agricultural commodities and extreme price volatility requires a global-level solution, say MEPs, in order to guarantee greater stability for farmers and secure food supplies for wide public. Parliament proposes a worldwide notification system of current states of stocks to counter speculation in agricultural commodities. Communication of the Commission: The CAP towards 2020 Press release on the committee vote (25.05.2011)
Common Agricultural Policy: a policy for the future
Horse with foal alongside pulling a farmer's small cart Finland, 1967 Agriculture has been at the heart of EU policy since the very start of the European integration project. It has undergone many changes through the years and has always been the subject of lively discussions. Below we give an overview of the history and evolution of the CAP.
The last revision of the CAP dates from 2003 and despite transitional arrangements meant to cope with the accession of the12 new member states in 2004 and 2007 it is clear that the agricultural policy again needs to be adapted.
How can money for farming be distributed more fairly among old and new member states? And how can it contribute to the EU-climate targets by making agri-industry greener? Can innovation play a role in agricultural policy and how can the EU stimulate this? These and other questions will be on the table when EU countries, the European Commission and the European Parliament discuss the future orientation of the EU, its policies and accompanying budgets over coming months.
Europe after the war
After severe food shortages during World War 2, agriculture was among the first policies to be included in the Treaty of Rome, signed in 1957. Looking for ways to avoid future shortages, the original six members agreed to principles including, market unity, community preferences, financial solidarity and income stability for farmers. Together with the setting of minimum prices for products, this boosted the productivity of EU agriculture in the years that followed.
CAP in the '60s and '70s
The policy was successful. Food shortages became a thing of the past, consumer prices were low and farmers received good value for their crops. However, the CAP led to the other extreme: overproduction of milk, butter, etc. Moreover, it was becoming increasingly costly. The new policy, laid down in the Mansholt Plan, led to the disappearance of small farmers and the consolidation of farming into larger, more efficient companies.
The 1980s: overproduction
The need to rationalise public spending, avoid overproduction and create a greener CAP kept farming at the centre of European reform. Quotas on dairy production were introduced in 1984 to remedy market inefficiencies. This was followed in 1988 by the introduction of an overall ceiling on farm spending.
1992-2008
In 1992, changes continued with the MacSharry reforms that refocused farmers on market demand rather than subsidies for growing a specific crop. The introduction of direct income support aimed to ensure a fair level of earnings. The focus was on cutting costs for the final consumer and ensuring European farmers could compete on the world market. It placed particular emphasis on environmentally-sound farming.
In 1999, Agenda 2000 brought a major shift in the CAP, introducing the "development of rural areas" as a key objective. The introduction of a ceiling on farm spending aimed to reassure taxpayers that CAP costs would not get out of control. In 2003 a further fundamental reform was agreed, the so-called "health check", which stipulated that subsidies would be further decoupled from production and linked to environmental, food safety and animal welfare standards.
Making way for the biggest CAP reform
After a public debate and consultation process, leading to almost 6000 suggestions from citizens and stakeholders, the European Commission will present proposals in the autumn. The reform, due in 2013, is likely to see a greener CAP, with a more even distribution of funds among EU farmers. It should be less complex and make the agri-sector more competitive vis-à-vis third countries, bringing it into line with the Europe 2020 vision of stimulating smart, sustainable and inclusive growth. Press conference following the Committee vote
EN
1
PHOTO
20111110PHT31093.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20120322PHT41539.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/sides/getDoc.do?type=TA&language=EN&reference=P7-TA-2011-297
EN
4
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/cap-post-2013/index_en.htm
EN
5
LINK
/ep-live/nl/committees/video?event=20120319-1500-COMMITTEE-AGRI&category=COMMITTEE&format=wmv
EN
8
LINK
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2010:0672:FIN:en:PDF
EN
9
PHOTO
20111027PHT30485.jpg
EN
13
LINK
/members/public/yourMep/view.do?name=De+castro&partNumber=1&language=EN&id=96891
EN
14
EPTVPHOTO
20110621PHT22048.jpg
EN
15
EUROPARL-TV
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/en/player.aspx?pid=29e8ffe1-9b68-4985-b30c-9eef01212032
EN
16
LINK
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2010:0672:FIN:en:PDF
EN
18
PHOTO
20110527PHT20388.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110526FCS20313 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110526FCS20313 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20111107IPR30751 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20111010IPR28832 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110526FCS20313 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110523IPR19949 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110523IPR19949 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FEA DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FEA DOC XML V0//EN
