Prerequisites for future EU-Russia agreement
External relations
Plenary sittings
2011-06-09 - 13:01
MEPs favour more ambitious trade, visa and cooperation agreements with Russia, but only if it does more to protect basic human rights, e.g. by ending "politically-motivated court decisions" against opposition leaders, removing curbs on press freedom, pulling its troops out of Georgia and allowing gay parades. This was the key message, in a resolution passed on Thursday, to government leaders at the EU-Russia summit in Nizhny Novgorod.
Aware of the two sides' interdependence in economic, energy and political relations, MEPs hope that the summit in Nizhny Novgorod (Western Russia), which started on 9 June, will give fresh impetus to negotiations for a new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with Moscow, the recently-agreed roadmap for visa-free travel between the two regions and EU support for Russia's bid to join the World Trade Organization. However, in exchange, Russia must tackle sensitive trade and human rights issues, they add.
Repression of opposition leaders, corruption of judges
MEPs criticise "political interference" in Russia and the "politically-motivated court decision" against Mikhaiel Khordorkovsky. They also urge it to investigate further the incarceration and death of Sergei Magnitsky and other political prisoners.
They also object to frequent restrictions on the freedom of opposition parties to register for the elections, such as the 2011 Duma elections.
Finally the resolution voices concern about the lack of media freedom and of freedom of assembly, as shown by the decision to ban a gay pride march in Moscow for the sixth consecutive year.
Visa policy and conflict with Georgia
The political groups take note of the recently-agreed roadmap for visa-free travel between the EU and Russia, which, they say, must be "based on a step-by-step approach" and bring real practical progress, they say. In any event, EU foreign policy High Representative Catherine Ashton must persuade Russia to cease issuing passports to citizens of the occupied Georgian provinces of South Ossetia and Abkhazia. Russia is urged to respect its agreement with Georgia and withdraw its troops from the occupied Georgian territories.
Energy: avoiding another Fukushima
"The supply of natural resources should not be used as a political tool", stress MEPs, who urge governments to look for a "balanced trilateral EU-Russia-Ukraine solution on future gas flows to the EU" and make a joint commitment at the summit to run ambitious stress-tests on nuclear power plants so as to avoid situations such as the nuclear melt-down crisis at the Fukushima plant in Japan. An amendment by the Green group calling for the "immediate shutdown of Chernobyl-type nuclear reactors still in use" was rejected (180 votes in favour, 409 against and 25 abstentions).
Accession to WTO
Finally, MEPs hope the summit will help to overcome the remaining obstacles to Russia's joining the World Trade Organisation (WTO), including Moscow's ban on all imports of EU vegetables and its failure so far to rectify "trade irritants, such as the Russia-Kazakhstan-Belarus customs union, which has led to higher consolidated tariffs".
20110609IPR21062 Adopted text will be available here (click on 9 June) Video recording of debate (click on 08.06.2011)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/research-by-date?language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
