Commissioner Hahn defends concept of "intermediate" regions
Regional policy
Committees Regional Development
2011-06-22 - 12:08
No region would lose out, but cohesion policy would gain in clarity if it put regions with a GDP of 75% to 90% of the EU average on an equal footing, regional policy Commissioner Johannes Hahn told Regional Development Committee MEPs in a discussion on Tuesday. Mr Hahn also outlined the key features of the legislative package on cohesion policy for 2014-2020, which he will present in the autumn
The Commission will propose a cohesion policy legislative package at the end of September, announced Mr Hahn. This will include a general regulation and specific rules for each fund and for territorial co-operation. "I hope that negotiations among legislators will be completed by the end of 2012, to prevent any delay in implementation, in the greater interest of the regions", he said. At the end of 2011, the Commission will follow up with the common strategic framework for all the structural funds.
This framework would make it possible to "define the funds' respective roles in translating the 2020 strategy aims into concrete investment aims", explained Mr Hahn, adding that he was working closely with research Commissioner Máire Geoghegan-Quinn to ensure that EU research and innovation policy contributes directly to the competitiveness of the regions and also benefits small and medium-sized enterprises.
A new infrastructure fund
An infrastructure fund is very likely to be created, said Mr Hahn, but its funding would not come from regional policy. Allocation decisions would nevertheless be taken in close collaboration with his department, notably for trans-European transport (TEN-T) projects.
A provisional intermediate category
Mr Hahn defended the concept of "intermediate" regions (with a GDP of between 75% and 90% of the EU average)´. These regions should all get the same type of support, whether they are growing wealthier and hence are being phased out of the convergence (objective 2) group, or poorer.
"This adjustment solution will not be engraved in stone", Mr Hahn reassured certain MEPs worried that funding would be dissipated, "but we feel it is the most appropriate solution for 2014-2020". He reiterated that this would make it possible to sustain the delicate balance between beneficiary countries and net contributor ones. "No country or region will lose out", he promised, adding that it would be necessary to await the budgetary proposal at the end of June to be able to put figures on this policy option.
The Commission is currently assuming that 64 to 68 regions will come under the convergence objective in 2014-2020 and 51 regions will come under the new intermediate category. Mr Hahn ruled out creating certain "sub-régions", as suggested by some committee members to take account of substantial differences in wealth within certain metropolitan areas such as London or the Ile de France.
In the chair: Markus Pieper (EPP, DE), followed by Danuta Hübner (EPP, PL)
20110620IPR21902 Regional Development Committee
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=REGI
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
