National Angle on President Buzek's visit to Ireland
Institutions
Ireland
2011-07-15 - 11:53
President Buzek speaking at the European Parliament Office in Dublin President Buzek made an official visit to Ireland on 11 and 12 July 2011, meeting with top Irish Government leaders, visiting both Houses of the Irish Parliament, addressing members of the Polish Community in Ireland, and also with cross-border groups receiving EU funding in the course of a visit to the site of the historic Battle of the Boyne.
President Buzek began his visit by travelling north of Dublin to the site of the Battle of the Boyne, which took place on 12 July 1690 and which led to William of Orange defeating King James II , and taking control of both Great Britain and Ireland. While seen as a great Protestant victory over Catholics, it was, in fact, a great European battle, with troops from several European countries taking part on both sides of the conflict. Monday's event, however, was conceived primarily as an act of reconciliation between North and South and between the Unionist and Nationalist traditions on the island of Ireland. Various community groups who had received EU funding to promote cooperation and reconciliation on both sides of the border were present at the event, which was also attended by Irish and Northern Irish MEPs, and national parliamentarians and local politicians. President Buzek spoke with representatives from these various groups, and then made a speech in which he emphasised that this was a powerful example of reconciliation for other areas suffering from historic conflicts. The Irish Minister for European Affairs, Lucinda Creighton, was there to greet President Buzek, and also made a speech.
President Buzek concluded his visit on Monday 11 July by returning to Dublin, meeting with Eamon Gilmore, Taniste(Deputy Prime Minister of Ireland) and also Minister for Foreign Affirs and Trade, and taking part in a dinner hosted by the former at which several Irish MEPs and former EP President Pat Cox were also present..
On Tuesday 12 July, President Buzek held an hour long meeting and then a joint press point with the Irish Taoiseach (Prime Minister), Enda Kenny. President Buzek made it clear on this occasion that he was in favour of a cut in the level of interest rate in Ireland's EU-IMF agreement, and without a corresponding increase in Ireland's corporate tax rate, as is being demanded by some countries, France in particular. With a view to the forthcoming Irish Presidency in the first half of 2013 President Buzek also had a fruitful discussion with the Taoiseach about the changes in Presidency relationship with the European Parliament, arguing that the extension of co-decision had meant that the relationship had become more intense and time-consuming since the adoption of the Lisbon Treaty.
Later on in the same morning, President Buzek visited the European Parliament Information Office in Ireland, met briefly with EP staff and then addressed members of the Polish community in Ireland.
He then called on, and had a half an hour discussion with the Irish President, Mary McAleese, who, in the autumn, will complete her second term of office.
President Buzek's visit concluded with a series of events at the Irish Parliament. He first met with the Speakers of both the Dail (Lower House) and Seanad (Upper House), and took part in a working lunch hosted by the former. He then made a formal address to the Seanad, and later spoke to, and answered questions at a special meeting of the Joint European Affairs Committee of both houses. Two Irish MEPs were also present, and posed questions to the President.
20110715IPR24199
EN
1
PHOTO
20110715PHT24202.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
