Statement of the President of the European Parliament, Jerzy Buzek, on situation in Libya
External relations
General
2011-08-22 - 14:32
Marcin Grajewski Press Team Leader BXL +32 2 28 46 088 PORT +32 498 98 15 50 EMAIL marcin.grajewski@europarl.europa.eu Friedrich Bokern Press Officer for President Buzek BXL +32 2 28 41 033 PORT +32 498 981 348 EMAIL friedrich.bokern@europarl.europa.eu "This is the revolution of the Libyan people and nobody can take it away from them. The Libyan people are free at last to decide about their own future" said Jerzy Buzek, President of the European Parliament. "This is also a strong sign for the entire region. No dictator will be able to continue his reign through the brutal use of force. The struggle against the regime might end today, but the struggle for democracy is only beginning. We have a responsibility to protect democracy."
The President of the European Parliament, Jerzy Buzek, made the following statement on the situation in Libya following the ongoing taking of Tripoli:
"Today is a day of joy for Libya and the entire region: Tripoli is about to be free. I congratulate the Libyan people and the National Transitional Council for their courage and determination. Their call for freedom and human dignity has been stronger than Gaddafi's terror.
Muammar al-Gaddafi´s rule is about to end. Another dictator will have fallen as we witness history in the making in North Africa and the Middle East.
I hope that this decisive victory of the people will quickly be consolidated without further bloodshed. The few remaining forces of the Gaddafi regime should read the signs of the time and render their arms. The suffering of the Libyan people must end now.
Those responsible for crimes against humanity and for other abuses must face justice. I welcome the commitment of the Transitional National Council to prevent any acts of blind vengeance, especially against ordinary citizens who have hitherto not been on their side.
The future of Libya starts now. I hope it will be a future of peace and justice, of unity and shared prosperity. This is the revolution of the Libyan people and nobody can take it away from them. The Libyan people are free at last to decide about their own future.
This is also a strong sign for the entire region. No dictator will be able to continue his reign through the brutal use of force. The fall of Gaddafi is a writing on the wall for Bashar al-Assad, Ali Abdullah Saleh and many others. They should listen to the aspirations of their people and step aside.
The EU stands firmly on the side of the Libyan people. We offer our help and our active support for managing the transition into a democratic Libya that is governed by the rule of law and by the respect for human rights.
The Libyan opposition has often been our guest in the European Parliament, most notably on 9 March 2011 before they were received by President Sarkozy in Paris. This visit triggered the rescue of the population of Benghazi in the very last minute.
Now is the time of democratic transition. Now is the time of parliaments and legislators. The European Parliament will continue supporting the Libyan people in their efforts of building a pluralist political landscape and in the preparation of the historic elections to come.
The struggle against the regime might end today, but the struggle for democracy is only beginning. We have a responsibility to protect democracy."
The European Parliament adopted a resolution on Libya on 10 March 2011, calling for the international community to assume its responsibility to protect, available via the link below.
20110822IPR25194 The President of the European Parliament European Parliament resolution on Libya (10.03.2011)
EN
1
LINK
/president/view/en/the_president/latest_news.html
-//EP//TEXT TA P7-TA-2011-0095 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
