European Parliament Journalism Prize 2011 winners are from France, Italy, Finland and Germany
Information society
General
2011-10-19 - 10:05
Ayla Sultan ÇIÇEK BXL (+32) 2 28 41009 STR (+33) 3 881 74005 PORT (+32) 498 98 13 37 EMAIL femm-press@europarl.europa.eu French, Italian, Finnish and German journalists this morning received the European Parliament's fourth annual prize for excellence in journalism from President Jerzy Buzek. The winners, in four categories, written press, internet, TV and radio, each received €5,000.
Romain Gubert of the French weekly journal Le Point won the written press award for his article "The incredible story of the Euro". The article relates in detail the story of the Euro, with testimonies from some of its progenitors, such as Jacques Delors and Christian Noyer. The jury described the article as "an outstanding piece of work that meets all the criteria of good, solid, investigative journalism" as well as "a superb educational tool for understanding the Euro".
Massimiliano Nespola of Italy won the internet award for his article in the Sapienza University of Rome's electronic journal "We do not know when, but a European constitution will come". Inspired by a conference on the book "Europa 2.0", the jury said that the blogger skilfully depicts the EU as an institution-in-progress, representing not just economic interest groups but all Europe's citizens.
Tero Koskinen of the Finnish Broadcasting Company YLE won the TV award for the reportage "Return of the Roma", on the conditions of Roma adults and children living in a caravan camp in Helsinki, which asks who should take responsibility for them at individual, local, national and European levels. The jury applauded the author for leaving enough room for the local angle and giving the Roma the chance to speak for themselves.
Steffen Wurzel of Germany won in the radio award for his report "Refugees, facilitators and fences" broadcast by SWR, a German media company. "A brilliant piece of journalistic work" was the panel's verdict on this radio report, which investigated how the EU deals with refugees at its frontiers, notably on the Greek-Turkish border. The jury said the author had found some highly interesting interviewees and created an almost cinematic atmosphere. The prize was received in Brussels today on Mr Wurzel's behalf by Mehmet Uksul, the producer of the programme.
Awarding the prize, EP President Jerzy Buzek said: "I know how difficult a task it can be to explain Europe, its policies and its decisions. Promoting a better understanding of the EU is sometimes hard and complicated. Bu it is vital. We are some 500 million Europeans and we are all concerned".
The award ceremony was followed by a panel discussion entitled: "Nothing is impossible: reporting on human rights and international conflicts". The national winners from EU Member States attended the event, as well as 60 young journalists who are participating in a workshop hosted by the European Parliament.
20111017IPR29432 European Parliament Prize for Journalism website Watch video recording of Award Ceremony (19.10.2011)
EN
1
LINK
http://www.eppj.eu/view/en/introduction.html
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/search-other-events?language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
