"Tunisia takes first step towards democracy"- Gabriele Albertini
External relations
2011-10-25 - 18:21
Mr Albertini, head of EP delegation to Tunisia, being interviewed by Tunisian media Democracy came a step closer for Tunisia as a massive number of its citizens headed to the ballot box Sunday. According to early indications, Islamic party El-Nahda is the frontrunner in the constituent assembly elections, the first to take place in the Arab Spring countries. We spoke to the head of the EP's electoral observation mission, Gabriele Albertini, who gave us his views on Tunisia, the elections and the EU's role in the country.
How did everything go and were democratic regulations respected?
As indicated in the preliminary observation report, the organisation was near-perfect; transparency and traceability were respected. In only a few cases there were an insufficient number of officials, creating some delays for voters.
There is one comment I will make, albeit minor, that registration at the polling stations could be improved for future elections. But generally speaking, it was a satisfying outcome.
Turnout was very high even though Tunisia lacks a political culture after 23 years of authoritarian rule. Does that encourage you to be optimistic?
It's a sign of the people's willingness to turn the page and move towards democracy. We saw long queues at the polling stations, showing motivation and a willingness to participate. Some polling stations closed early because 100% of the electorate had voted.
Turnout was around 80% of registered voters (around 55% of the population registered to vote in advance). As for non-registered voters (who could also vote), I don't really have any figures , but generally speaking turnout was massive.
The initial count indicates a victory for the El-Nahda Islamic party. What's your reaction?
We must respect the vote of the Tunisian people because the conditions of transparency, traceability and international standards were respected.
The EU's neighbourhood policy can be compared to homeopathic medicine. Human rights, freedom of religion and expression, freedom of the press etc. can be prescribed in small doses through economic, political and cultural relations. If the newly-elected don't respect our value system, well, we'll try to develop that.
What role will the EU and EP play in supporting Tunisia's democratic transition?
The EU's neighbourhood policy should allow the promotion of a real democratic process.
Tunisia has demonstrated it wants to move towards democracy but the future might not pan out that way. If the initial count is confirmed, the new constitution might defend values different to ours, which might lead to a loosening of ties.
What is your feeling about today and the future?
It's a joyful day when we look at the turnover, the enthusiasm and the action of the Tunisian people.
It's a very important first step, but it's only the start, there must be a constitution next, followed by legislative elections, a government and legislative decisions etc.
This interview was conducted in French
20111021STO30023 Press release on the mission Images from the election (Audiovisual website) UE EOM website Coverage on Twitter (FR) The election in photos on Flickr
EN
1
PHOTO
20111021PHT30013.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://bit.ly/tpUjNa
EN
4
LINK
http://www.eueom.eu/tunisie2011/accueil?LANG=fr
EN
5
LINK
http://www.twitter.com/Europarl_FR
EN
6
LINK
http://bit.ly/qk7uJd
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20111024IPR30158 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
