Strasbourg opening: Buzek on natural disasters, Arab spring, Eurogroup debate and human rights
Institutions
Plenary sittings
2011-11-14 - 18:18
Andrew BOREHAM BXL (+32) 2 28 42319 STR (+33) 3 881 74005 PORT (+32) 498 98 34 01 EMAIL andrew.boreham@europarl.europa.eu Parliament's sympathy with the victims of the latest earthquake in Turkey and floods in Italy and France, political developments in North Africa and the Western Balkans, and Wednesday's key debate on the Eurogroup and economic governance, were highlighted by EP President Jerzy Buzek at the opening of the Strasbourg session. Mr Buzek also looked ahead to Parliament's high-level human rights conference on 23 November.
Earthquake in Turkey
Mr Buzek expressed Parliament's sympathy for those close to the victims of the previous week's earthquake in Turkey, which, together with that three weeks before, had claimed almost 700 victims.
Floods in Italy and France
He also voiced sympathy with victims of the previous week's floods in Italy and southern France, where storms and rain remain a threat, and praised the efforts of the emergency services and local authorities to help.
Libya and Tunisia
Visiting Libya at the end of October, Mr Buzek had used meetings with the President, ministers and civil society representatives to stress the importance of putting into practice fundamental values such as democracy, the rule of law and human rights.
In Tunisia, he had met the Prime Minister, the head of the Central Bank and the leaders of the four main political parties, whom he urged to build an inclusive society, in which everyone, including women, can participate.
Western Balkans
From North Africa, the President had gone to toured the Balkans, including stops in Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia. In Serbia, he called for a normalization of relations with Kosovo, and in Bosnia and Herzegovina, for an end to the internal political stalemate. In Srebrenica, he laid a wreath to commemorate the July 1995 massacre. He also congratulated Croatia on completing its EU accession negotiations and encouraged it to pursue reforms.
Key debate
President Buzek highlighted Wednesday's key debate with European Council President Herman van Rompuy, Commission President José Manuel Barroso and Eurogroup President Jean-Claude Juncker on Eurogroup, economic governance and preparations for the December European Council.
Euromed Scola
Mr Buzek noted that that a two-day plenary session in Strasbourg of a parliament of young people from countries in the Mediterranean region had passed recommendations on social dialogue and engagement, migration and integration, equal opportunities, the environment, transport and renewable energy, and improving education and employment.
He welcomed their involvement in issues facing MEPs, adding that "We can be proud of their responsibility for the future of the Euro-Mediterranean region, which showed these young people to be future political leaders".
Human rights conference
Mr Buzek invited MEPs to take part in the European Parliament's 23 November High Level Conference on Human Rights and Sakharov Network meeting. This would be a unique opportunity for debate with human rights activists from around the world, including winners of the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought, he said.
Willy De Clercq
Finally, the President called a minute's silence to mark the passing of former European and Belgian statesman Willy De Clercq, who served as an MEP, a European Commissioner and Deputy Prime Minister of Belgium for over a quarter of a century. He expressed Parliament's condolences to Mr De Clercq's family.
Agenda changes
The Commission statement on the contribution of the common fisheries policy to the production of public goods was taken off the agenda.
The vote on the Fleckenstein report on the European Maritime Safety Agency was also taken off the agenda.
On Wednesday afternoon, the second and third debates will be switched around, so that the order will be as follows:
1. Statement by the VPC/HR - EU-US summit of 28 November 2011
2. Oral questions - The open Internet and net neutrality in Europe
3. Oral questions - Situation of the Roma in Member States
4. Statement by the VPC/HR - Banning cluster munitions
5. Oral questions - Modernisation of VAT legislation in order to boost the digital single market
* * *
Frank Vanhecke (BE) joined the Freedom and Democracy Group with effect from 9 November
20111114IPR31457 Final draft agenda Plenary session newsletter EP Live Europarl TV Press conferences and other events European Parliament audiovisual web site
EN
3
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/live/live-video?language=en
EN
4
LINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/en/home.aspx
EN
5
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/live/live-program?language=en
EN
6
LINK
http://audiovisual.europarl.europa.eu/
-//EP//TEXT AGENDA 20111114 SYN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20111028NEW30562 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
