Human rights resolutions: military trials in Egypt, death penalty in Iran
Human rights
Plenary sittings
2011-11-17 - 17:25
Ron KORVER BXL (+32) 2 28 44659 STR (+33) 3 881 74903 PORT (+32) 498 98 35 88 EMAIL ronnie.korver@europarl.europa.eu Paola BUONADONNA EMAIL Press-en@europarl.europa.eu EMAIL paola.buonadonna@europarl.europa.eu ADDINFO (+44) 207 227 43 35 STR (+33) 3 881 74822 PORT (+44) 7 786 060 531 Parliament calls for the immediate release of Egyptian blogger Alaa Abd El-Fattah, and an end to military trials of civilians under Egypt's emergency law, in a resolution passed on Thursday. In another resolution, it urges Iran to impose a moratorium on the use of the death penalty, reform its judicial process and remove restrictions on fundamental freedoms.
EP calls for immediate release of Egyptian blogger Alaa Abd El-Fattah
The European Parliament calls for the immediate release from prison of Egyptian blogger Alaa Abd El-Fattah and reiterates its call to stop prosecution of civilians by military courts in Egypt. Mr El-Fattah and thirty other civilians are on trial following the Maspero clashes on 9 October, which began as peaceful demonstrations for Coptic rights but ended with over 25 people dead and 300 injured.
Mr El-Fattah refuses to answer the military court's questions about the demonstrations, stating that "he would only answer to an impartial civil court" The blogger -who was imprisoned under the Mubarak regime after campaigning for judicial independence - is now charged with "inciting violence against the armed forces" (...) assaulting military personnel and damaging military property".
In its resolution adopted on Thursday, Parliament condemns the "judicial harassment" of Mr El-Fattah and calls for the immediate release of all prisoners of conscience and political prisoners. Furthermore, the emergency law should be ended without delay, it adds.
Parliament also reiterates its call for "an independent, thorough and transparent investigation into the Maspero clashes" and calls on the Egyptian authorities to guarantee that "no blogger, journalist or human rights defender is subject to direct or indirect harassment or intimidation in the country".
Human rights organisations' reports say that more than 12,000 civilians have been tried before military tribunals since March 2011 in Egypt.
Iran: worsening human rights situation
Parliament expresses its grave concern at "the steadily deteriorating human rights situation in Iran". It specifically refers to the growing number of political prisoners, the sustained high number of executions, including of juveniles, widespread torture, unfair trials, exorbitant sums demanded for bail, and heavy restrictions on freedom of information, expression, assembly, belief, education and movement.
MEPs strongly condemn the use of the death penalty in Iran and call on the Iranian authorities to institute a moratorium on executions, pending the abolition of the death penalty. They deeply deplore the lack of fairness and transparency of the judicial process and also the lack of appropriate professional training for those involved in it.
Parliament calls on the Iranian authorities to release all political prisoners, including the political leaders Mir-Hussein Mosaic and Medic Karrabul, the human rights lawyers Nasrin Stouten and Abdolfattah Soltani, the student activists Bahareh Hedayat, Abdollah Momeni, Mahdieh Golroo and Majid Tavakoli, the journalist Abdolreza Tajik, Pastor Yousef Nadarkhani, the filmmakers Jafar Panahi and Mohammad Rasoul and all the other individuals listed in the report by UN Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Iran, Ahmed Shaheed.
The Iranian Government should immediately allow Mr Shaheed to enter Iran, to address its human rights crisis. The government’s complete failure to co-operate with him and its continued refusal to allow him access are "an indication that Iran has no intention of taking meaningful steps to improve the human rights situation", says the resolution.
European companies should live up to their corporate social responsibilities by not supplying goods, technologies and services which Iran could use to control and censor information and communication flows and to track down citizens, notably human rights defenders, MEPs add.
Procedure: Motions for resolutions (Rule 122)
20111117IPR31728 Adopted texts will be available here (click on 17.11.2011)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
