Croatian accession, 2012 budget, December summit on Brussels plenary
Institutions
2011-11-29 - 13:17
View of circular staircase outside the hemicycle in Brussels In a busy Brussels plenary 30 November and 1 December, MEPs discussed the upcoming summit, which will focus on the economic crisis, with European Commission Vice-President Olli Rehn, voted on Croatia becoming the 28th member of the EU and gave a final stamp of approval to the budget for 2012.
European Central Bank President Mario Draghi made his first appearance in plenary, since taking up the post, for a debate on the 2010 ECB report. On Thursday, International Aids Day , the house debated the EU's global reaction to HIV/Aids. MEPs also adopted a new code of conduct .
20111129FCS32711
Newsletter - 30 November-1 December 2011 - Brussels plenary session
MEPS voting in plenary EU summit agenda
The EU's economic and financial predicament, a key item on the 8-9 December European Council agenda, will be debated with Commissioner Olli Rehn and Polish Secretary of State for European Affairs Mikołaj Dowgielewicz on Wednesday.
EU budget 2012
Parliament votes Thursday on next year's EU budget and also on plans to top up this year's budget, as the Commission has run out of money to pay research and social spending bills in the Member States.
Opening the way for Croatia to join the EU
Parliament is to vote its formal consent to Croatia's EU membership bid on Thursday. This will open the way for Croatia's EU accession treaty to be signed and ratified by all 27 Member States. It could join in 2013.
Code of conduct for MEPs: final vote
A new code of conduct for MEPs will be put to a final vote on Thursday. It sets out rules and principles to govern their outside activities, so as to avoid any conflict of interests.
Democratic, not technocratic, economic policy co-ordination
The "European semester" plan to co-ordinate EU Member States' economic policies must acquire real democratic legitimacy, and not be treated as a mere technical exercise, if it is to form the bedrock of better economic governance, says a resolution to be debated Wednesday and put to a vote Thursday.
Mario Draghi in Parliament for first time as ECB chief
The European Central Bank's newly-appointed chief Mario Draghi faces his first debate with MEPs in that capacity on Thursday morning. The debate will be kicked off by Parliament's rapporteur on the ECB's 2010 activity report.
Stepping up HIV/AIDS prevention
Fairer access to testing, treatment and care is needed to reduce the number of new HIV/AIDS infections, says a draft resolution to be voted on Thursday, World AIDS Day. Over 25,000 new infections recorded in 2009 and an estimated 30% of people with HIV/AIDS are unaware they carry the virus.
Other issues
Better EU funding terms for crisis-hit regions
Early school leaving
EU aid worth €26 million for redundant workers in France and Portugal
Proposed EU-Ukraine association agreement
Facilitating local border traffic in the Kaliningrad area
Parliamentary immunity of Georgios Toussas
Faster and smarter customs checks Draft agenda EP Live EuroparlTV European Parliament Audiovisual website
The European Semester: a new structure for macroeconomic coordination
A magnifying glass on euro notes ©BELGA/DPA/J.Buettner The economic crisis has highlighted the need to tackle macroeconomic imbalances more systematically and last year EU ministers agreed to create a "European semester for economic governance" to assess national economic and fiscal policies at EU level before they are adopted by member states. During Wednesday's plenary MEPs discussed a report on the coordination tool.
The aim of the European Semester is to provide a structured framework under which EU countries coordinate budgetary and economic policies in line with the Stability and Growth Pact and the EU 2020 growth strategy .
How it works
The six-month cycle starts in January when the Commission publishes the Annual Growth Survey , to be discussed by the Council and EP ahead of the Spring European Council in March.
At the Spring Council countries will - on the basis of the survey - identify the main challenges facing the EU and give strategic advice on policies.
Member states then present and discuss their medium-term budget strategies through Stability and Convergence Programmes and outline planned action in areas like employment, research, innovation, energy and social inclusion in their national reform programmes . These two documents are sent to the Commission for assessment in April.
Based on that assessment, the Council will issue country-specific guidance by June or July, including guidance to countries whose policies and budgets are unrealistic or don't address key challenges in terms of competitiveness, imbalances, fiscal consolidation etc..
In July, the European Council and the Council provide policy advice before countries finalise the draft budgets to be approved by national parliaments for the following year.
Lessons from the first European Semester
This year was the inauguration of the semester and the EP raises some concerns. The report prepared by French Socialist Pervenche Berès notes that the quality of national reform programmes varied greatly in terms of "correctness, transparency and feasibility" and urges member states to improve the quality of their reports. It also calls on the Commission to ensure that that the programmes are "sufficient to reach the EU2020 headline targets...(which was) not the case" in the first European Semester.
From 2013, the report proposes the organisation of an inter-parliamentary forum at the EP ahead of the Spring Council for members of national parliamentary committees, to be followed by a further meeting after the summit with the chairs of the committees responsible for the European Semester within national parliaments. It also proposes that the EP provide an overall evaluation at the end of each European Semester.
Next steps
The next annual growth survey in January 2012 will include an assessment of how well recommendations were implemented and will be the starting point for a new European Semester cycle. EP report on European semester Commission on the European Semester Watch the debate live Wednesday
MEPs to vote on accession of Croatia to EU Thursday
A map of Croatia in Europe MEPs approved Croatia's accession as the 28th member of the EU 1 December. The treaty must be ratified by all 27 member states and Croatia will hold a referendum, after which the country is expected to join the EU on 1 July 2013, but what do you know about Croatia?
Located in Central Europe, Croatia is bordered by Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia to the east, Slovenia to the north-west, Hungary to the north-east and Montenegro and the Adriatic Sea to the south. It has mountains, a long coastline and includes over 1000 islands, 48 of which are inhabited.
More details
Croatia is the 18th most popular tourist destination in the world and tourism accounts for 20% of the country's gross domestic product.
Like most Central and Eastern European countries the population is well-educated .
It has one of the lowest fertility rates in the world at 1.5 children per mother.
The EU is Croatia's biggest trading partner and GDP per capita stood at 63% of the EU average in 2008, according to the EU's Eurostat statistics agency.
EU membership
Croatia applied for EU membership in 2003. It became a candidate country in 2004 and accession negotiations started in October 2005, after the chief prosecutor for the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia said Croatia was fully cooperating with the court. Negotiations were concluded on 30 June. Croatia Capital: Zagreb Population: 4.4 million Area: 56 594 km² Official language: Croatian Literacy: 98.1% Independence from Yugoslavia 25 June 1991 Draft report on Croatian accession Recommendation on Croatian accession Press release on committee vote Commission page on accession
Carlo Casini: "We want to make clearer rules"
Carlo Casini The European Parliament pressures other EU institutions to be transparent and insists that EU accounts should be clean. So it is vital that MEPs are seen to be beyond reproach in the conduct of their own public lives. Will an updated code of conduct help? Ahead of a vote on his report in plenary on Thursday, Italian EPP member Carlo Casini explained what the new code aims to do, but noted that conscience is the ultimate guardian of everybody's behaviour.
There was already an EP code of conduct, why was a new one needed?
To mark the clear need for transparent behaviour, after some worrying episodes. We want to make clearer rules, easily readable, unforgettable and introducing greater strictness.
Can you outline three main changes introduced by the new code?
Firstly there will be more sanctions, to be applied by the president and not by the quaestors (a group of MEPs responsible for administrative and financial matters directly affecting MEPs). Secondly, a consultative committee will be set up, constituted by MEPs, to give advice to the people applying the sanctions and to MEPs who need guidance on interpreting the code of conduct. Thirdly, there will be a limit of €150 on gifts destined for MEPs.
What happens to an MEP who doesn't respect the code?
If it's an administrative violation there will be sanctions, ranging from censure to the suspension of the daily allowance and dismissal from an EP office, for example the post of vice-president or committee chair. Obviously, we can't expel an MEP from the EP because they hold a democratic mandate from their electorate. However, if there are serious legal issues involved national judges must take action against these crimes.
What do you say to critics who claim the new code is not strict enough?
They are wrong. The working group consulted the codes of conduct of all those member states that have them and I can tell you that this is the most rigorous code ever. The code includes sanctions that some consider excessive, like the €150 limit on the value of gifts. In addition, we have a register of lobbyists for the Commission and EP, something that has never existed before.
Is the new code clear enough to avoid future problems?
It is clear. But we have to consider that, firstly, things like those that happened this year can happen even out of the Parliament, in the street, in a bar, or in national offices. Secondly, the final arbiter of correctness and transparency is the individual conscience. If a citizen is honest, he or she doesn't need a code of conduct. But if a citizen is dishonest, any code of conduct is insufficient. Nevertheless, codes of conduct are necessary. Draft report on Code of conduct Press release after committee vote Carlo Casini EuroparlTV video: Transparency and responsibility
Opening: Yemeni visitors, Turkey, Egypt, Morocco
View of the outside of EP building in Brussels Parliament's President Jerzy Buzek, greeted visiting human rights defenders from Yemen, reported on his visit to Turkey the previous week, and commented on the recent elections in Egypt and Morocco in his opening address at this week's Brussels plenary part-session.
The President welcomed Yemeni human rights defenders Ms Amal Basha, Mr Esadin el Asbahi and Ms Talakol Karman, noting that Ms Karman, a journalist and co-ordinator of the Yemeni youth revolution, would be one of three women to be awarded this year's Nobel Peace Prize for fighting for the safety of women and women's right to work for peace.
Turkey
Mr Buzek had sought during his official visit to Turkey the previous week to revive negotiations by encouraging the Turkish side to find a positive solution to the Cyprus problem before Cyprus takes over the EU Council Presidency.
He had met the President and spoken in Parliament about the need for Turkey to introduce reforms to secure freedom of expression and the rights of women and minorities and had also talked to Patriarch Bartholomew about the situation of Christians in Turkey.
Egypt
Commenting on Egypt's 28 November parliamentary elections, the first since President Mubarak was ousted, Mr Buzek urged the authorities political parties and civil society to work together to ensure that the results reflect voters' wishes.
Morocco
On Morocco, which held parliamentary elections on 25 November, Mr Buzek noted that constitutional reform would give the Moroccan parliament more responsibility.
The President nonetheless regretted that neither Egypt nor Morocco had invited EU election observers.
Incoming MEP
MEP Kent Johansson (ALDE, SE), had taken his seat with effect from 21 November, when his credentials were approved.
Agenda changes
Wednesday 30 November
Two reports on requests by Mr Viktor Uspaskich (ALDE, LT) for the defence of his immunity will be taken in a joint debate as the first item after the order of business.
Thursday 1 December
The oral question on the EU global response to HIV/AIDS becomes a statement by the Commission.
A report on the request by Mr Luigi De Magistris (ALDE, IT) for the defence of his immunity will be included directly in voting time.
MEPs urge EU leaders to adopt bold measures to quell crisis
Commissioner Olli Rehn (left)and Mikołaj Dowgielewicz in plenary The crisis that has engulfed the eurozone shows no signs of abating and bolder measures are needed to restore market confidence, MEPs warned ahead of an EU summit 8-9 December in Brussels. They urged a more active role for the European Central Bank and the introduction of eurobonds during a debate Wednesday.
Polish Secretary of State for European affairs Mikołaj Dowgielewicz , speaking for the Council, said structural reform and fiscal consolidation must be continued. Summit decisions should be guided by three principles, he said: more unity, more Europe in the form of strengthened economic governance and strengthened EU institutions, essentially a bigger role for the Commission.
European Commission Vice-President Olli Rehn said the main priorities for 2012 are continued fiscal consolidation, a strengthened banking sector through recapitalisation and protecting the EU's financial stability. Commenting on changing the treaties, he explained that it wouldn't be a solution for the current crisis but could help the EU avoid future crises.
Socialist group leader Martin Schulz agreed that treaty revision won't restore confidence, because the eurozone cannot wait two years for changes to take effect. European leaders must decide if they want eurobonds or not and whether the ECB should be a lender of last resort or not, he said. "With common debt management and pooling of debt we can win back confidence."
Speaking on behalf of the centre-right EPP Paulo Rangel said that eurobonds, as well as the restoration of trust in the ECB and IMF are key. He said measures should be taken at an EU level, but also said national deficits must be brought down and budgetary balance established.
Liberal group leader Guy Verhofstadt noted that the financial press is warning that the endgame is approaching, not because of the Greek, Italian or Spanish situation, he said, but because the two main countries - Germany and France - are incapable of dealing with the crisis. "It's time for a eurobond market and fiscal union," he said
Rebecca Harms for the Greens also called for the introduction of eurobonds because the measures introduced so far have not worked. Italy and Greece are in a death spiral, she said. The austerity measures in place make this inevitable.
Jan Zahradil for the ECR group warned that if eurozone countries really want to keep the euro, it may mean that they have to give up fiscal sovereignty. "Our group does not oppose the euro, it opposes the measures that are bad for it."
An increasing number of European countries are suffering because of the crisis and are experiencing the consequences of the financial market system, GUE/NGL group leader Lothar Bisky said, proposing the "rules of the game" are changed.
EFD leader Bastiaan Belder warned that measures by the ECB and the introduction of eurobonds will only provide a temporary solution if underlying problems like high debt levels and weak competitiveness are not addressed. Summit agenda
HIV/AIDS: Further action needed to cut new infections
infographic Midway through the 2009-2013 EU action plan to combat HIV/AIDS, the MEPs are concerned that the number of new infections remains high and called for more effective prevention strategies in a resolution voted 1 December, World AIDS Day.
There were close to 27,000 new infections in the EU in 2010, the European Centre for Disease Control (ECDC) and World Health Organisation Europe say in its latest annual report.
The EP wants country specific action plans to combat HIV, with emphasis on prevention, testing and equal access to treatment everywhere in the EU.
Testing and early diagnosis is very important, since the ECDC estimates that around a third of those infected with HIV in the EU do not know that they have the virus.
Groups most at risk need support and prevention measures should include adequate sex education and access to the means of protection, says the EP resolution.
In the EU, predominant HIV transmission is through sex between men, followed by heterosexual contact, especially among people originating from countries with generalised HIV epidemics, and intravenous drug use.
Parliament calls on member states to take all necessary action to end discrimination against people living with HIV/AIDS and supports the UN's commitment to ensure treatment for 15 million people worldwide and reduce new infections 50% by 2015. Resolution ECDC HIV Report Combating HIV/AIDS in the EU (2009‑2013)
New code of conduct for MEPs approved
MEPs voting on the Casini report A new code of conduct for MEPs was endorsed by Parliament on Thursday. The code sets out rules and principles which MEPs will need to follow in their contacts with outside interests, so as to avoid conflict of interests.
"The new, the first-ever code of conduct for MEPs will be a strong shield against unethical behaviour and a major improvement on the present status quo. I appreciate the wide consensus in favour of the code, drawn up in record time of 10 weeks. Today is the second anniversary of the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty - it is an excellent day to adopt the code - more power means more responsibility," said EP President Jerzy Buzek.
"The wide consensus expressed by MEPs on the new code of conduct has a symbolic meaning that cannot be ignored. It proves to the public opinion that the European Parliament is a transparent body to serve common good and build a Europe based on freedom and justice. It also shows the renewed commitment by MEPs towards the community that elected them" said Constitutional Affairs Committee chair and rapporteur Carlo Casini (EPP, IT), before the vote.
The code's guiding principle is transparency. MEPs will have to provide clear declarations of their paid activities outside Parliament and their remuneration, as well as of any other functions which might constitute a conflict of interest.
The code also contains an explicit ban on receiving payments or other rewards in exchange for influencing parliamentary decisions. There are clear rules on the acceptance of gifts and on the position of former MEPs working as lobbyists.
Financial declaration
MEPs will have to state, publicly and on line, any professional activity performed during the three years before their election, as well as any membership of any board of companies, NGOs and/or associations held during that period or currently.
Any remunerated activity undertaken during the term of office, including writing, lecturing and providing expert advice, even if occasional, will have to be made public if it earns more than €5,000 a year.
Financial support of any nature and any financial interest that may cause a conflict of interests will also have to be disclosed. Any change to the declaration must be notified within 30 days and in the event of failure, the member will no longer be eligible to hold offices within Parliament.
Gifts
Any gift or benefit valued at more than €150 received by an MEP during the performance of his or her duty must be refused or, if the MEP was officially representing Parliament, passed on to Parliament's President. Reimbursement of direct costs will not be deemed a gift, if the event is attended further to an official invitation.
Sanctions
Should the code be breached, and upon a decision by the President after having consulted an advisory committee, a member may be sanctioned with a reprimand, a forfeiture of the daily allowance from two up to ten days, temporary suspension from Parliament's activities (not including the right to vote) for a maximum of 10 days, or the loss of the role of rapporteur or other elected offices within Parliament (for the latter two sanctions, a confirmatory decision by the President is needed). Any such sanctions will be published on Parliament's web site.
Former MEPs
Former MEPs who subsequently work as lobbyists in a field directly linked to EU affairs will not benefit from the facilities otherwise provided, during the time of such activity.
Advisory committee
An advisory committee will provide guidance to MEPs and advise the President on what steps to take in the event of alleged breaches of the code.
Next steps
Parliament's Bureau will lay down measures for implementing the code of conduct, and in particular for the introduction of a monitoring procedure.
The code of conduct was approved with 619 votes in favour, 2 against and 6 abstentions. The new rules enter into force on 1 January 2012.
Procedure: amendment to EP Rules of Procedure
Croatia’s EU accession: green light from Parliament
Croatian and EU flags ©EPA Parliament gave its consent to Croatia’s EU membership, as required by the treaties, in a vote on Thursday. However, it called on Zagreb to address remaining challenges, especially in the field of judicial reform and the fight against corruption and organised crime. Croatia could become the EU’s 28th Member State on 1 July 2013.
The proposal for Parliament to consent to Croatia joining the European Union, steered through the House by Hannes Swoboda (S&D, AT), was passed with 564 votes in favour, 38 against and 32 abstentions. MEPs greeted the decision with a standing ovation in the plenary chamber.
"Today is a good day for Croatia and the EU," underlined President Jerzy Buzek after the vote. He added, "the European Parliament had thrown its full weight behind Croatia's EU accession. We have given a clear sign of the extent to which the EU wants Croatia." "Croatians will soon be able to show their support for the EU through a referendum," he emphasised.
The next step will be for Croatia and the EU Member States to sign the accession treaty at the 8-9 December European Council meeting, after which it can be ratified by all 27 Member States. Croatia is expected to join the EU on 1 July 2013.
In an accompanying non-binding report, also by Mr Swoboda, and adopted with 550 votes in favour, 34 against and 41 abstentions, MEPs welcome the conclusion of the accession negotiations, urge Croatians to turn out for the EU referendum and vote for the accession treaty, and call on Member States to complete the ratification process swiftly. They look forward to receiving Croatian observers in Parliament.
MEPs emphasise that they will follow the pre-accession monitoring process and ask the Commission to keep Parliament abreast of the extent to which the Croatian authorities honour the commitments made in the negotiations.
While acknowledging Croatia’s preparedness for accession, MEPs invite Zagreb to tackle remaining challenges, especially concerning judicial reform and the fight against corruption and organised crime.
They urge Croatia to step up its efforts to prosecute war crimes, comply with all International Criminal Tribunal recommendations for the former Yugoslavia and encourage the return of war refugees, especially Serbs.
Finally, MEPs call on Croatia to continue making structural reforms to its economy, stimulate employment by reviving the labour market and pursue fiscal consolidation in order to boost competitiveness.
Procedure: consent
EU budget for 2012 approved by Parliament
EP president Jerzy Buzek, smiling after signing the EU budget Parliament endorsed the final size and priority spending areas of the 2012 EU budget, as agreed by its negotiating team and the EU Member States on 18 November, in a vote on Thursday.
Parliament's priorities adopted
In its proposals, the European Parliament had focussed on growth, innovation, employment, border control, migration management, and support of democratic development in the Arab world. These priorities were all taken on board by the Member States in the final deal.
Limited increase in payment appropriations
The increase in payment appropriations will be limited (1.86%) as requested by the Member States. The Commission, Council and Parliament agreed to take stock in the course of next year to see if the budget is realistic or if repairs are necessary. Member States signed a declaration to this end. The overall budget for next year will amount to €129.1 billion (1.86% increase) in payments and €147.2 billion (+3.8%) in commitments.
EP conciliation delegation chair Alain Lamassoure (EPP, FR) said: "In times of crisis we have managed to reduce operating costs while maintaining growth and competitiveness." He was nonetheless critical of the Council's preoccupation with the level of payments, whereas commitments were being disregarded. "We have to bring the two back in line to avoid having to discuss haircuts across the board every year", he said.
Mr Lamassoure thinks that the only way forward is to reduce Member States' contributions to the EU budget and replace them with own resources. "There will be no future financial framework without a political agreement on new resources", he said.
Parliament's rapporteur for most of next year's budget, Ms Francesca Balzani (S&D, IT) welcomed the adoption of Parliament's priorities by the Member States. But she also warned that the agreed level of payments might not be sufficient to pay all the bills next year.
The MEP who steered the administrative budgets through Parliament, José Manuel Fernandes (EPP, PT), said that the budget for administration - making up somewhat less than 6% of the total budget - "strikes the right balance between austerity and administrative needs". He underlined that administrative budgets for the different institutions were treated with rigour and will grow by around 1% only, which is a cut in real terms.
Budgets Commissioner Janusz Lewandowski welcomed the outcome of the negotiations and the self-restraint of the institutions in deciding their own budgets. However, he also warned that the agreed level of payments might be too low. "We have to reflect on our annual budget procedure, especially at the end of a multiannual financial framework. For now I trust the joint declaration signed by the Member States", he said
Nuclear Fusion Research (ITER)
The negotiated deal included an additional €100 million to finance the ITER nuclear fusion research programme in the south of France. A much greater amount will be needed to accommodate all the additional costs for this programme in future years. This will be further discussed in the Budgets Committee and with the Member States in "trailogue" meetings.
Amending the budget for 2011
Parliament also adopted an agreement on the additional financial needs for 2011. This was necessary as the Commission could no longer pay the bills in some policy areas. Apart from a reshuffle between budget lines, an additional €200 million will be added to the budget so that payments can again be made for Social Fund projects and research.
Another draft amending budget for 2011 will be voted in the Budgets Committee next week. It should meet the financial needs to cover EU Solidarity Fund aid totalling €38 million to Spain and Italy to repair damage caused by earthquakes in Lorca and flooding in the Veneto region.
Procedure: Budgetary Video recording of the press conference Webtool: the EU budget in your country Ten facts about the EU Budget EP Rapporteur for Budget 2012: Francesca Balzani (S&D, IT) EP Rapporteur for other sections: José Manuel Fernandes (EPP, PT)
Things we learnt in Brussels plenary: 30 November – 1 December
Photo montage of Draghi's appearance During this week's two–day plenary session in Brussels, MEPs approved the final EU budget for 2012 and voted overwhelmingly in favour of Croatia's accession to the EU. They also discussed the forthcoming EU summit and ECB's activities.
EU budget 2012 - After months of negotiation, MEPs approved on the final budget for 2012 and EP president Jerzy Buzek signed it into law. "This budget shows that the EU institutions, in difficult times, are ready to agree on a budget combining budgetary discipline and investing in future growth," Budget Committee chair Alain Lamassoure said.
MEPs approved Croatia's accession as the 28th member of the EU by a large majority. Now, the accession treaty has to be signed and ratified by all 27 member states. The country is expected to join July 2013.
Thursday morning Mario Draghi made his debut appearance in plenary as head of the European Central Bank. He said central bank bond purchases "can only be limited" and that a new "fiscal compact" is needed. Draghi was speaking after the world's major central banks acted jointly to boost dollar liquidity in the European banking system. In a resolution on the ECB's 2010 annual report, MEPs praised its efforts to control inflation and maintain market stability but expressed concerns that interest rate increases could slow recovery.
Under revised rules on local cross-border travel voted by MEPs on Thursday, the entire Russian enclave of Kaliningrad and some border districts of Poland will be considered as a single EU border zone. Currently a border area, which may be exempted from EU rules on border checks, is defined as a zone extending no further than 50 km from the border line. The change will enable more people in the area to travel more easily across the border.
MEPs also adopted a resolution that urges member states to raise the mandatory school leaving age from 16 to 18, or until the end of secondary education, and to create more "second chance" schools. This could cut the early school leaving rate to below 10% and would have economic and social benefits. More than 6 million young Europeans leave education and training with lower secondary level qualifications at best. The current EU average rate of early school leavers is 14%.
The EP wants an EU-Ukraine Association Agreement, creating much greater integration between the two to be initialled before the end of the year. They see an agreement as a lever to bring about changes in the Ukraine. Plenary in photos on Flickr
EN
1
PHOTO
20111128PHT32600.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20111128PHT32588.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/plenary/en/home.html
EN
4
LINK
/ep-live/en/schedule/schedule
EN
5
LINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/en/home.aspx
EN
6
LINK
http://audiovisual.europarl.europa.eu/
EN
7
PHOTO
20111128PHT32584.jpg
EN
9
LINK
http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=MEMO/11/14
EN
10
LINK
/ep-live/en/plenary/video?event=20111130-1500-PLENARY_SESSION&vodtype=Live
EN
11
PHOTO
20111128PHT32602.jpg
EN
15
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/enlargement/candidate-countries/croatia/index_en.htm
EN
16
PHOTO
20111128PHT32582.jpg
EN
19
LINK
/meps/en/988/Carlo_CASINI.html
EN
20
LINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/en/player.aspx?pid=f9fa1d53-1a6e-4cc0-9521-9f9e0126419a
EN
21
PHOTO
20111130PHT32755.jpg
EN
22
PHOTO
20111109PHT31022.jpg
EN
23
LINK
http://www.european-council.europa.eu/council-meetings.aspx
EN
24
PHOTO
20111201PHT32993.jpg
EN
26
LINK
http://ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications/Publications/111129_SUR_Annual_HIV_Report.pdf
EN
27
LINK
http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/public_health/threats_to_health/sp0016_en.htm
EN
28
PHOTO
20111128PHT32580.jpg
EN
29
PHOTO
20111109PHT31036.jpg
EN
30
PHOTO
20111128PHT32578.jpg
EN
31
LINK
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/ep-live/en/other-events/search?legislature=&organ-code=&start-date=&end-date=&pageIndex=
EN
32
LINK
/news/en/headlines/content/20110630MUN23022/html/EU-budget-at-glance
EN
34
LINK
/meps/en/96979/Francesca_BALZANI.html
EN
35
LINK
/meps/en/96899/José%20Manuel_FERNANDES.html
EN
36
PHOTO
20111128PHT32574.jpg
EN
37
LINK
http://www.flickr.com/photos/european_parliament/sets/72157628221172125/
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A7-2011-0384 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A7-2011-0389 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A7-2011-0390 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20111114IPR31470 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A7-2011-0386 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20111114IPR31468 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT MOTION B7-2011-0615 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20111021BKG29990 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
