This week in the EP: credit rating agencies, silicon implants, Bill Gates
Institutions
2012-01-23 - 11:15
Outside of EP building in Brussels In the first full week of committee meetings of 2012, MEPs will elect chairs and vice-chairs. Among big ticket items on the agenda this week are: hearings on sovereign debt and credit rating agencies, a discussion on maritime safety following the Concordia accident and defective silicon breast implants. Bill Gates will be in parliament Tuesday to talk about the impact of effective aid.
During the elections, committee chairs and vice-chairs may stand again. Election is by secret ballot unless there is only one candidate, when they are elected by acclamation.
The Economics Committee will hold a hearing on credit rating agencies Tuesday, focusing on conflicts of interest and concentration in the industry. MEPs will also hold hearings Monday and Tuesday on the sovereign debt crisis.
Other topical issues on the agenda this week are a discussion Tuesday on maritime safety with Siim Kallas, in the wake of the Concordia cruise ship disaster and whether changes are needed to legislation governing medical devices following the recent health scare about defective silicone breast implants .
Energy agreements between member states and third countries will be under the spotlight Wednesday when the Energy Committee looks at proposals for information on intergovernmental energy agreements to be shared among EU countries. It is proposed that the Commission be informed of existing contracts and ongoing negotiations so that it can, in turn, offer expertise, coordination of joint efforts and recommendations to member states, to ensure compliance of agreements with EU internal market rules.
Bill Gates will be in the Development Committee Tuesday afternoon to talk about health and development projects and the impact of effective aid.
This week also marks 100 days since the opening of Parlamentarium , the EP's visitors' centre. It has quickly become a popular attraction for residents and visitors to Brussels so why not pass by next time you are in town.
20120120STO35890 Watch live Committee websites Parliamentarium
EN
1
PHOTO
20120120PHT35841.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/ep-live/en/schedule/schedule
EN
3
LINK
/committees/en/parliamentary-committees.html
EN
4
LINK
/visiting/en/parlamentarium
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
