Guimarães and Maribor show they are state of the art as European capitals of culture
Culture
2012-02-06 - 12:21
Opening ceremony of the new EU capitals of culture Guimarães in Portugal and Maribor in Slovenia will host a wealth of cultural events this year as European capitals of culture for 2012. Throughout the year art lovers will be able to enjoy anything from opera to contemporary dance, classical and popular music, film, theatre, visual arts, literature and architecture. Not only is this a chance for the two cities to show what they offer, it will also help to raise their profile and attract more investment and tourism.
Guimarães boasts one of Europe's youngest populations - almost half of its inhabitants are under 30. It is also up to royal standards as this is where the first king of Portugal Afonso Henriques was born. The city wants to use its reign as cultural capital to transform its economy from an industrial to a creative economy able to compete on a global scale.
Green parliamentarian Rui Tavares , from Portugal, commented: "Guimarães, one the most beautiful cities in Portugal, has become an example of urban recovery. Having been picked as European Capital of Culture has clearly transformed it into a cauldron of contemporary creativity and strong millennial heritage. It's a must for 2012 culture tourism. And by the way, let us not forget the nearby city of Braga, just 25 km away, which is this year's European Capital of Youth."
Meanwhile Maribor has invited guest artists from all around to world to set up long-term international cultural exchanges as part of the Cultural Embassies programme. Residents of the medieval city will also have an important role to play as co-creators and visitors of exhibitions, street events and concerts in the Town Keys initiative.
Slovenian Christian Democrat Milan Zver said: "As a Slovenian coming from the Lower Styria region, I am very proud that Maribor, the second largest city in Slovenia, holds the flattering title of the European Capital of Culture in 2012. In the past Maribor has been a central-European crossroads, where different cultures coexisted peacefully and enriched one another. I hope this tradition will continue and that as many EU citizens as possible will visit Maribor and other nearby touristic jewels in 2012."
Since the European capital of culture initiative was launched in 1985, more than 40 cities have had the honour of holding the title. The European Parliament's Committee on Culture and Education advises on the applications received. After this the Council chooses the new capitals of culture based on a recommendation from a panel that includes MEPs.
20120203STO37166 Guimarães Maribor EU capitals of culture
EN
1
PHOTO
20120201PHT36837.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.guimaraes2012.pt/
EN
3
LINK
http://www.maribor2012.eu/en/
EN
4
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/culture/our-programmes-and-actions/doc413_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
