Gender pay gap: "It's time to go from legislation to good practice"
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2012-03-02 - 07:00
Edit Bauer "How is it possible that after having legislation on equal pay for over 50 years it doesn't work and we still have a 16%-17% gender pay gap in the EU?" asks Slovakian Christian Democrat Edit Bauer. Mrs Bauer is the author of a report on equal pay for male and female workers for equal work or work of equal value. In this interview Mrs Bauer speaks about the EU's focus for this year's International Women's Day, to be celebrated on 8 March.
What are the consequences of the pay gap in the short, medium and long term?
It's not just that women are at a higher risk of falling into poverty. Statistics show that the gender gap is growing with age. There is also a gap when it comes to pensions and older women have a greater risk of falling into poverty than men do. Long term consequences: in those countries where the gap is the smallest, the birth rate is the highest, so the lack of equality has consequences for the demographic trend. It also affects economic competitiveness.
What needs to be changed to overcome this reality?
Even in sectors where women employees prevail, men used to have higher salaries. Horizontal and vertical segregations of economic sectors is deeply rooted in the structure of the economy but it has also much to do with culture and with society's approach to motherhood. What is really striking is there are now more women who graduate, and statistics show that women who start their working careers are better paid than young men in the UK. The gap appears for the first time when women return to the labour market after their first maternal leave. I have a feeling that the demographic crisis and its consequences will affect us in the future as much as the economic crisis does now. It's time to change the approach to motherhood and evaluate parenthood in society.
What are the concrete proposals of your report and how can the EU help tackling this problem?
It is a very complex issue. It is an illusion to expect that any change of legislation will profoundly change the whole situation. It seems to me that everybody should contribute to solving the situation. In the Parliament legislation is the only tool we have and I ask myself the question: how is it possible after having legislation on equal pay for over 50 years it doesn't work and we still have a 16%-17% gender pay gap? It is necessary to take a look at the legislation and check why it is so less effective in comparison with other fields. Our answer is: we should make legislation more effective and impose some sanctions which could be unusual as first steps but necessary, because without any sanctions it will not work. There are some good examples of good practices to block access to privileges coming from public procurement and European funds. Why do we grant free access to those who do not accept and breach the principle of equal pay? Member states have very different situations regarding collective bargaining and the position of trade unions for example. We need to empower those who apply for a job so that they are able to get some information about the salaries situation. The wage system should be more transparent. There is a proposal to publish the structure of salaries once a year, on equal pay day for example. There are also good examples of this in the EU. There are very few discrimination cases taken to court, so it is also necessary to think about how to help those who are suffering from wage discrimination to take their cases to court or empower equality bodies so that they are able to impose sanctions.
If you had to tweet a message on the 2012 International Women's Day what would it be?
Its time to go from legislation to good practice and its time to close the gender pay gap.
20120223STO39239 Draft report Edit Bauer Women's Rights and Gender Equality Committee
EN
1
PHOTO
20120222PHT39128.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/meps/en/23866/Edit_BAUER.html
EN
4
LINK
/committees/en/FEMM/home.html
-//EP//TEXT COMPARL PE-480.835 01 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
