10 things you should know about the March plenary
Institutions
2012-03-16 - 09:54
Four photos showing a minute's silence for the victims of the Swiss bus accident, Schulz speech on Fukushima, one of the entrances to the Parliament building, Van Rompuy arrives at the Chamber How to get out of the economic slump? This was the question MEPs tried to answer in their plenary debate on the recent European Council that formalised the deal on the EU fiscal pact. They also approved the creation of a special committee on organised crime and gave a green light to the agreement between the EU and US ending the so-called beef war.
At the opening of the plenary on Monday, a minute's silence was held for the victims of the Syrian repression, of terrorism in Europe and of the Fukushima nuclear disaster one year ago.
Parliament also observed a minute's silence on Wednesday for the 28 victims, mainly children, of the bus accident in Switzerland. President Martin Schulz expressed the "deepest sympathy to the families of the victims and to all those affected by this disaster".
Together with European Council and Commission presidents Herman Van Rompuy and José Manuel Barroso, MEPs debated on Tuesday the conclusions of the EU summit of 1-2 March that focused on solving the economic crisis.
The Parliament approved the creation of a special committee on organised crime , corruption and money laundering, with a mandate of one year on Wednesday. The "anti-mafia committee" will look into how organised crime has infiltrated the EU's economy, public administration and financial systems
On Wednesday, Parliament approved a deal allowing the EU to keep its ban on imports of hormone-treated beef , in return for increasing its quota for imports of high-quality beef from the US and Canada.
Diabetes -related problems already account for about 10% of EU healthcare expenditure so the EU must develop a dedicated strategy focusing on prevention and early diagnosis of this growing problem, MEPs said in a resolution Wednesday.
On Thursday MEPs condemned a recently launched website in the Netherlands that invites people to post complaints about migrants from Central and Eastern Europe and called on the Dutch government to speak out against it.
MEPs condemned shortcomings and irregularities in the preparation and execution of Russia's presidential elections on 4 March and called on the winner of the elections Vladimir Putin to begin a "sincere dialogue" with protesters.
The legal and societal implications of raids by Israeli forces on Palestinian TV stations in the occupied Palestinian territories were in the spotlight during the EP's human rights debate on Thursday afternoon
After Facebook, Twitter, Flickr, and LinkedIn, the European Parliament is now on Foursquare so why not check in.
20120315STO40948 March plenary focus March plenary session in photos EP on Foursquare
EN
1
PHOTO
20120313PHT40592.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://www.flickr.com/photos/european_parliament/sets/72157629205884952/show/
EN
4
LINK
https://foursquare.com/europarl_en
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20120302FCS39886 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
